[MUSIC] [COUGH] In this lecture we are going to
see what transactions are, and what are some of the challenges in them. So essentially a transaction is
a series of operations executed by a client on one side and
a server on the other side, where each of the operations
in the series is an RPC. However, RPCs have semantics of course,
you know, as you have studied RPCs have at least
once at most once, or other semantics. Transactions had a special
requirement too. And this requirement is an all or
nothing requirement. Essentially this means that, when a transaction completes
it has one of two choices. One, either it commits all of its
operations on the server-side. Which means that any of the updates
that the transaction did, which means the client did
during that transaction, are all reflected on
the server-side objects. So all of the operations
need to be reflective. The other choice is that, the transaction
aborts, which essentially means, that none of the updates
are reflected on the server-side. It's as if the server had never
seen the transaction, at all. And so, essentially, the transaction can
do whatever it wants during the execution. But when it comes time to commit,
the transaction has one of two choices. Either commit, and deflect everything
on the server-side, or abort, and deflect nothing. Transaction before we discuss,
more about transactions. Here is an example of a sample transaction
that might be done from a client that is trying to book a ticket on an air,
on a, on a flight, to a server that is maintaining records of you know,
flights and how many seats are there. So if you notice here, the first
operation here is on the client side. This, this entire thing is a transaction. Of course, the first operation is that the
client gets a transaction id by calling openTransaction, which is also an RPC
from the client side to the server-side. Next, it gets the, flight availability for a particular site ru,
of a particular flight run by airline ABC, flight number 123 on a particular date,
in server.getFlightAvailability. This is an RPC. This value is an integer and
it's stored in x. If x is greater than 0, meaning that are,
there's at least one seat available on this flight, then it makes an update
to that flight, by booking a ticket. This is another RPC. This changes a server state, so this is
almost, this is essentially a write, or an update to the server state. This value is told in y. This is maybe, the ticket confirmation or
something and then, once again the write is done, where
a write is returned to the server-side, where a seat preference or
an aisle preference is done. Is communicated to the server-side. Once this is done,
now it comes crunch time, where a closed transaction is called by,
the, transaction, and at this point the transaction must either commit all
these operations, or abort all of them. In other words, the server,
must at the end of this transaction, either have seen all the operations in
that order, or none of them at all. So for our purposes some of these
operations will be classified as reads and writes. The first operation where
we got flight availability, where none of the servers state was
changed, is a read operation from an object, where in this cas the object
is a flight on that particular date. The next two operations
where you book the ticket, as well as you put an an aisle
preference are both write operations, or update operations because they
change something on the server-side. They, they change server state. 'Kay, so it's essentially
is write operations that we are most concerned about. We want, all these writes to be
reflected on the server-side, or none of them to be reflected at all,
at the end of the transaction. So transactions have as I mentioned
before, some requirements. The most important requirement is the
atomicity, requirement which is an all or nothing principle. This means that a transaction should
either, complete successfully, so its effects are recorded conveniently
on all server-side objects, or the transaction, has none of its effects
recorded on the server-side objects. It's as if the transaction
had never executed, at all. [NOISE] The second requirement comes from
the fact that there might be multiple clients accessing the server. Imagine, you know,
there might be thousands of, or hundreds of people, trying to book,
seats on the same flight. So there are multiple clients and
multiple transactions, that are concurrently trying to access, the
same set of objects on the server-side. They are all, concurrently
communicating with the server-side. So we also need isolation among
transactions, in other words, we want a transaction to be indivisible,
from the point of your other transactions. This all or nothing principle, which
we talked about from the server-side, must also be true from one
transaction to another. [NOISE] This means that, one transaction
cannot have access to the intermediate results, or states of other transactions. Also, a transaction must
be free from interference from operations of other transactions. Okay, so this is the isolation principle
where, [NOISE] essentially even though the transactions are executing
concurrently, the net result, the end result as far as the server state
is concerned at the end of all of those transactions, is as if the transactions
had executed one transaction at a time. They did not interfere with each other. They did not read each other's partial
results, or intermediate results. So why is this challenging? Well, first of all the biggest
challenge is that clients, may crash. The servers may also crash. And this means that, we need to have
a way that preserves atomicity and isolation in spite of,
failures in the system. Second, transactions
could run concurrently. So, one easy way of, assuring
isolation for instance, is to let, the server execute only
one transaction at a time. But this serially limits the number
of transactions that you can execute concurrently. Transactions per second, is a very
important metric for most, systems, so, that they can, maximize their revenue. So, whether it's a banking servers,
running on a bun, a bunch of bank servers, or whether it's an airline reservation
servers, running on a bunch of servers. You want to maximize
the transactions per second, because that maximizes revenue,
it reduces the, latency for the clients. So you want to allow,
as much concurrency as possible. You want to allow as many transactions
concurrently as possible, and this is somewhat,
at odds with the isolation principles. So you want to preserve isolation
while still maximizing, the transactions per second. And so, this series of
lectures concurrency control. We look at this problem, how do you,
preserve isolation, and atomicity and all other requirements of transactions. While still,
increasing the level of concurrency. Later on, we will see what happens,
when you, replicate objects from the server-side,
when you have, objects distributed out, out across multiple servers
on the server-side. Okay, so that we'll see later on,
when we discuss replication control. [NOISE] So, Atomicity and isolation
are not the only two requirements, from transactions. Essentially, the requirements
from transactions are, very nicely captured in an,
ac, acronym known as ACID. Acid stands for, Atomicity,
Consistency, Isolation, and Durability. [NOISE] Atomicity says, the all or
nothing principle which we talked about. Consistency says that if the server starts
in a consistent state, the transaction, must end the server in a consistent state. For instance for a banking transaction,
you know, you, you'd, if you're transferring money from one
bank account of yours to another. You want the total of those two bank
accounts to be the same at the end of the transaction. That's an example of consistency. Isolation, as we talked about before, says
that each transaction must be performed, without interference from other
transactions, meaning that non final or intermediate, or partial results of a transaction,
are not visible to other transactions. And finally durability, when
a transaction does commit, and eh, and reflects its updates on the server-side,
these updates must be held for eternity. No matter what happens on the server-side,
these updates, must not be lost at all. They must be saved in permanent storage. So, why is this challenging at all? Well, it becomes challenging when you
have multiple clients and one server. We are not considering, replication on
the server-side or distribute services. There's only one server machine,
and but we have multiple clients, each client executing a separate
transaction, with that server. So, let's see a couple of
examples of what could go wrong. [NOISE] The first thing that goes wrong,
when you don't care for isolation, when you don't do anything about
isolation, is a lost update problem. [NOISE] Here's an example
of two transactions. The transactions are identical in code. But the way in which
the transactions are shown, shows an interleaving of the operations
of the two transactions. So let's look at one of these
transactions, say Transaction T1. T1 gets the number of seats in
a particular flight, ABC123. That's stored, that is stored into
a local variable x, local at that client. If x is greater than 1,
then x is decremented by 1, and the value of x is written
to this server object, ABC123. Then the transaction tries to commit. Transaction T2 is identical. It has identical operations
in the same order, but Transaction T2 starts
slightly after Transaction T1. And so some of its operations are slightly
delayed compared, to the T1 counterpart. So let's see what happens if, this
particular interleaving as is shown in this slide, where Transaction T1
executes its first operation first. Then Transaction T2 goes next,
with its, first two operations. And then Transaction T1 goes,
with its next three operations, and so on, and so forth. With this interleaving where
time goes from top to bottom, let's see what, could go wrong. So let's say, initially, the server has
10 seats available on this flight, so when Transaction T1 reads
the number of seats from ABC123, the local variable at X is set to 10. Notice that this local variable x is
a local variable at Transaction T1, and this local variable x,
is a local variable at Transaction T2. So, you know,
consider two separate processes, each with their own address spaces. Each has it's own variables. Then so these two, xs,
x in T1 and x in T2, are not related, they're in completely,
different address spaces. Say, and returning to our example,
next, when, x gets T2, sorry, T2 gets x, soars into x,
it also gets a value of ten, because, the, at the server-side
the number of seats has not changed. Now, next what happens is that, because Transaction T1 sees that x is
greater than 1, it decrements x by 1, and stores the resulting value,
ten minus one, or 9, into ABC123. At this point, the server-side is
reflecting the new value of 9. Okay. However, T2 is still working with
this old value of x equals 10, and so, it decrements x by 1, to 9. And it also, stores that resulting
value 9 into the server-side. Now, essentially, say the two transactions
commit, what happens is that, on the server-side, the resulting number
of seats is told as 9, rather than eight. Instead of having two
different transactions, each of which booked one seat each,
we've have had two transactions, each of which booked one seat each. But on the server-side only one
of those seats was reflected. Okay, so this is what is known
as the lost update problem. Either one of T2's or T1's updates is,
is lost in this particular example. Okay, and the reason this happens
is because we didn't really, make any effort at preserving
the asset properties. Another example of what could go wrong,
is, is here. This is known as the inconsistent
retrieval problem. Here again, I have two transactions. These two transactions are different, and I'm showing an interleaving order for
them. Let's see, each of these transactions. [NOISE] So Transaction T1,
the one of the left, first gets seats from a flight ABC123. Then gets seats from
a different flight ABC789. Stores them in variables x and
y respectively. Again x and y are local variables at T1. [NOISE] Then it transfers 5
seats from ABC123 to ABC789. It does so
by simple writing x minus 5 to ABC123, and writing y plus 5 into ABC789,
and then it commits. In the meantime, concurrently,
Transaction T2 is trying to add up, or sum up the total number of
flights available on, sorry, seats available on these two flights. So it gets the number of seats
from ABC123, stores it into x, a local variable at T2. [NOISE] Similarly, it ABC789, and
stores it into y, a local variable at T2. It adds both of them, and
prints out the result and value. So let's see what could go wrong. [NOISE] So
at the server is saying initially, the number of seats available on
ABC123 is 10, and ABC789 is 15. 'Kay, so, really Transaction T2 should
output a total value of 10 plus 15 or 25 seats at the end of this. That's the value that we would expect,
right? [NOISE] Let's see what really happens, so, first, when transaction T1 executes its
first three operations, it gets the values of 10 and 15, then it writes the value
of 10 minus 5, or, 5 into ABC123. At this point,
this on the server-side ABC123 is 5. Now Transaction T2 executes
its getSeats ABC123. And it gets, x equals 5 because that's
what is the value on the server-side, it gets y equals 15,
that's unchanged from four. And when it adds these two,
it prints out a total value of 20, 'kay? So, what really got lost
in translation here? Was this 5 which was in transit
in a sense, in Transaction T1. Where Transaction T2 read
the partial results or the intermediate results or
the dirty update, this write done by T1, was an intermediate result
that was read by T2. And that is what read to
the wrong result of 20, where the result should really have in 25. So this is what is known as
an inconsistent retrieval problem, and this also arises because we
didn't do anything special here, to guarantee asset properties. In the next lecture we'll see, mechanisms that prevent transactions
from affecting each other, and that try to guarantee asset properties
when you have, concurrent transactions and many concurrent transactions,
executing with one server [MUSIC]