[MUSIC] Continuing our discussion
of replication control, in this lecture we will see
an important technique for committing transactions in replication,
in replicated systems. This is known as two-phase commit. In general, committing transactions is an
important problem in replicated systems, and in general in systems where you
have objects across distributed servers. So here's an example of a transaction
that touches objects at multiple servers. Here in this case,
we ignore replication for now. But let's just say each
object has only one replica. So there is 26 objects here. There is 13 servers,
each storing toward the objects. So server 1 Stores objects A and B. Servers two stores objects C and D. And so on and so forth. Server 13 stores objects Y and Z. The transaction T here
writes to all these objects. When it reaches its commit point, we need to make sure that all
of these servers are commit. So, when T tries to commit, we need to make sure that all
the servers commit their updates. In this case, T will actually commit,
the transaction T will commit. Or that none of these servers commit
to their updates to their objects. In this case, T will abort. Okay.
So this is an example of an all or nothing property here, which we want
to guarantee for the transaction. But we also want to guarantee on
the server side in a group of servers with distributed objects. This problem, obviously,
should be familiar to you. This is, in fact, nothing but
the consensus problem. In fact, in the concept of transactions, it's known as the atomic
commit problem here. So, one way to do the atomic commit
is known as one-phase commit. This is a first-cut naive approach
where you have a coordinator server, say, a special server elected
using lead election protocol. You are election protocol. The coordinator server is a special
server that issues on the commit and simply tell the 13 servers involved here,
hey, why don't you commit your object
updates from transaction T? If something goes wrong on the transaction
side, if the transaction T wants to abort, then it tells that
coordinator server to abort. And it then, the coordinator server,
then relays to the servers that they should abort their updates from
transaction T to their objects. So what's a problem with this? Well, the first issue is that the server,
the server storing the objects, the servers one through 13, have no say in
whether the transaction commits or aborts. These servers are, after all, machines. So, they have the memory, and
the memory might be corrupted. For instance,
the object that they're storing, or the updates from that particular
transaction may be corrupted. And in this case, you'll end up with
an inconsistent system because, as far as the transaction T and
the coordinator are concerned, they have wanted to commit but
the server just cannot commit. It just cannot commit because it does not
have all the necessary information there. Also, the server might crash before
receiving the message that asks it commit. And in this case, the updates it had from transaction T
might have been stored in memory and lost. And in this case, you, again, have
a system where you have data being lost. So, to our rescue comes a two-phase commit
protocol, which to this day is one of the most widely used protocols for
committing transactions. Here, again,
you have a coordinator server. Again, elected using
a lead election protocol. And you have the remaining servers. As the name suggests,
instead of using just one phase where the coordinator tells the server,
server group, you have two phases here. So, the coordinator first sends
a prepare message to the servers. The prepare message asks
the servers to prepare to commit. When a server receives the prepare
message, it saves the updates from that particular transaction to disk so
that is durable now. And after this, if the server fails, it can then
recover starting from this log on disk. Tthen, if everything is okay on the server
side, it responds with a yes vote. If something went wrong, for
instance, the memory got corrupted or it has lost its updates,
it responds with a no vote. The coordinator server waits for
these votes. If it receives any no vote, at least
one no vote from any of the servers, it will then send out an abort
message to all the servers. Okay?
So, this ensures that, unless all the servers have voted yes,
you will, in fact, end up aborting the entire transaction. Also, the coordinator server might not
receive all the votes within a time out. If it does not receive all the votes
within a time out, it also, again, sends an abort message to everyone. This is accounting for
the case where a server might have failed, server 13 might have failed, and
might never be able to send a vote back. And in this case, the coordinator must abort because
it doesn't know what happened, what went wrong with server 13, and
whether server 13 will ever come back up. Okay, so once again,
in summary, if the coordinator server receives at least one no vote or
it does not receive all the, in this case 13 votes, within the time
out, it will send an abort message. However, if it receives all of the 13
votes within the time out, it then sends out a commit message knowing that
everything has gone right on the server sides, on the server side, and they have
saved their updates to the log on disk. Once they have voted yes and no, they can't immediately go ahead and
commit, right? So, if they voted yes, they can't really
commit before receiving the next message. And so, they need to wait until the second
phase commit message is received. When the commit message is received, they can then commit updates from disk to
the store, to the actual database, and they can respond back with an
acknowledgement back to the coordinator. When the coordinator receives
all the acknowledgements, okay, it can then say that
the two-phase commit is done. How do you handle failures and how do you
make sure the correctness is guaranteed? So, first, if a server,
one of the 13 servers in our case, voted a yes,
it cannot unilaterally go ahead and commit the updates from the disk
into the store or into the database. It needs to wait for the commit message. Why is this? Well, one of the other servers in
the group might have voted a no or might have failed. In this case, the server might
have to abort in the future. However, if a server votes no, meaning
something has gone wrong on its site, if it votes no in the very first phase,
then it can abort right away. Why is this? Well, this is because the coordinator
would have received at least one no vote. And so, it would have decided
an abort in the future. So no matter when that abort is decided, it will never be a commit because
this server has voted a no. Okay, so, if a server votes no,
it can go ahead and abort right away. But if a server votes yes, it needs to
wait until the commit message is received. How do you deal with crashes? So, to deal with server crashes, each server saves the tentative
updates into permanent storage, meaning disk, right before replying yes or
no in the first phase. It can't save it after replying yes or
no because it might fail right after replying yes or no,
but before saving it on disk. It needs to save it on disk
before replying yes or no. If it fails before this,
before it saves it on disk, anyway the coordinator will time out
waiting for the server's response and will abort the transaction. If it times out,
if it crashes after saving it on disk but before replying yes or no, again,
that's going to be an abort decision. If it crashes after saving it on disk and
sending a yes vote, then it might be a commit decision, but at least it has all
the necessary information saved on disc so that it can recover or achieve it after
it's recovery, after it has rebooted. The coordinator might also crash. And so, to recover from these
crashes the coordinator also logs all of it's decisions and
the received and sent messages including counts of how
many okay's it received on disk so that if it fails it can then recover and
start where it left off. However things might go wrong and
the coordinator might never come back up, so a new election might be required
to elect a new coordinator. In this case, the coordinator might
need to either start where the old two-phase commit left off
by creating the servers, or just restart the two-phase
commit altogether again. What about message losses? The messages that are sent out during
the two-phase commit might also get lost. The prepare message, which is the first state message going
out from the coordinator to the servers asking them to prepare to
commit might get lost. Now, if the prepare message gets lost,
then the server, one of the 13 servers, might decide to abort unilaterally
after a timeout waiting for the first phase message. In this case, because it will
never vote yes to the coordinator, the coordinator will always decide
an abort for this particular transaction. Alternatively, to deal with prepare
message loss you can have the coordinator send out a second prepare message. Now the yes no vote in the first phase,
again, might get lost as well. If this gets lost, then the coordinator
will end up aborting the transaction. This is tough luck. Even though everything might have gone
right, everyone might have voted yes, just because the message, one of these
yes votes was drawn by the network, you decide to abort the transaction. Yes, this is pessimistic. But at least it maintains correctness,
it errs on the side of safety. And in this case, the coordinator,
unless it receives all the votes, will decide to abort the transaction. Finally, the commit or abort message. The second-phase message might
get lost in the network itself. And in this case, you're okay because the
coordinator has already made a decision, it has logged the decision on disk. So, the server can poll
the coordinator unless, if it has not received a decision in
the second phase for what its decision is. Okay?
So, it can poll it repeatedly until the coordinator comes back up and sends
it either a comment or an abort message. So, a two-phase commit is used at
the commit point in distributed servers. Another alternative to two-phased
comment is, of course, a consensus solution such as Paxos. So Paxos is also being widely used
nowadays, increasingly used nowadays, to decide whether to commit
a transaction or not. Okay, but if you use Paxos, you need to
make sure that if any server votes a no, then everyone will abort. That's the only catch in using Paxos. Paxos can also be used for ordering updates that are being
received by replica groups. So, when a replica group receives multiple
updates from multiple clients, you need to make sure that all the replicas
receive the updates in the same order. This is, again, because in replicated
state machines you want to make sure that all the replicas have the same series
of states at the transition through, and the same series of outputs. So, in order to do this, essentially,
the way you use Paxos is that a server, any one of the servers in the replica
group, proposes a message for the next sequence number. So, one of the updates it has, it
proposes it for the next sequence number. And then, the group either
reaches consensus on this or not. If it doesn't,
then another message is considered for the next sequence number, and
you continue so on and so forth. Okay?
So, this is the way in which Paxos is used to totally order
updates within the group itself so that all the servers apply these updates
in the same order as each other. So that wraps up our discussion
of concurrency control and replication control. And for replication control, I've
discussed the case where you have multiple servers, distributed servers in the cloud,
which are either replicating objects for fault-tolerance or load-balancing
objects across multiple servers with or without fault tolerance. Replication can be implemented using
a couple of flavors, active replication, passive replication. And these can be implemented using
concepts that we've learned earlier in the course, specifically, using flavors
of multi-cast and virtual synchrony. And, finally, we have seen how to commit
transactions when you have distributed servers in the Cloud. The two phase commit protocol is one of
the most widely used protocols today. [MUSIC]