[MUSIC] After having seen the concurrency control, you're going to see the replication
control in this next series of lectures. Today, in this lecture
we discuss replication. So, what's the difference
between concurrency control and replication control? Well, concurrency control you use with
the case where you have multiple clients executing operations or transactions
with just one server on the other hand. So you have multiple clients and
one server together. Replication control focuses
on the server side, instead of just having one server,
you have multiple, server machines. And the objects are now spread out
over these multiple server machines. You may have five objects,
which are stored, say, two objects at one machine and
three objects at, another server. Or you may have these objects replicated,
so each of these objects has say two
replicas at each of those two servers. So we'll discuss both the cases with and without replication in
this series of lectures. So why is replication important at all? Well first of all, replication means
that an object has identical copies, each maintained by a separate server. These copies are typically
called as replicas. I may use the term replica to also refer
to not just the object copy itself, but also the server itself. If I say the replica server, I mean the server that is storing
the replica of the object. So why is the replication important? Why is it important to have multiple
identical copies of the same object? Well, there are a couple of reasons. The first reason is fault tolerance. If you're making k replicas of each
object, you can tolerate up to, k minus one failures of any of
the servers in the systems. So, if every object is replicated
say k equals five times, then, your system, no matter how large it is,
can tolerate up to four, k minus one failures of any of the servers, and
still not lose any of these objects. And still be able to serve out reads and writes, to at least one of
the copies of the objects. The second reason to do a, fault raw,
to do replication is, load balancing. Essentially if you have, twice as many
copies of your, of a given object then each of the copies faces only half the
number of reads and writes that it does. So increasing the number of copies lowers
the load on each of the copies by a factor of k, if you have k replicas
compared to just one replica. In general the fault-tolerance
requirement can be captured as a higher
availability requirement. Eh, so let's calculate what availability
really is, so if a server if any servers, say all the servers are identical,
just for the purposes of this discussion. So if each server is down a fraction f of
the time, f might be, you know, some small number like five percent or, 0.05,
that's a server's failure probability. So if you don't have any
replication where each object is stored on exactly one sever. Then the probability that the object
is available is a probability that the server is up. Which is just one minus the servers
failure probability or one minus f. Okay, so when you have k
replicas the availability of the, of the object is a probability that at
least one of the k replica servers is up, which is one minus the probability
that all the replica servers are down. And that second probability, the
probability that all the replica servers are down, is simply the failure
probability of one server raised to the number of servers, or f to the power
of k, so that's one minus f power k. Yes, so for those of you who
know your math and property, you will notice as that K is higher,
this number and one minus f power k, is actually much closer
to one than one minus f. How close is it? Well, let's look at some real numbers. So, here's a table that shows you in the
first column, the failure probability, f, so you have several sample values,
0.1, 0.05, 0.01. These are the failure probabilities of a
single server, and then the next column it shows what is the availability of
the object when you have no replication, where exactly one copy of
the object is made in. Essentially, this value is just one minus
f, so one minus point one is point nine, which is 90%, and one minus .05 is .95,
which is 95% and so on and so forth. With k equals three replicas,
you can calculate the availability of the, of the object as one minus f power k. And that turns out, for f equals 0.1,
it turns out to be 99.9%. This is often called as three nines
of reliability because you have three nines over here, 99.9%. With f equals 0.05,
the availability goes up because the silver\g failure
probability here has gone down. So it's gone up to 99.9875 percent. When you have f equals 0.01, you actually
end up having six nines of your elaboraty 99.9999 percent, so
that's a much higher elaboraty. And, now, when you see nines
of elaborately being offered in an industry product or
in an industry service. And now you know what exactly it means,
they are actually talking about availability percentages as
we're talking about here. With a high number of replicas,
you get a much higher availability. So just compare you know,
when you have f equals 0.1 and you have k equals three replicas,
you have three nines of reliability. But when you have k equals five replicas,
you have five nines of reliability. Similarly with failure
probability of f equals .01, with no replication you have
two nines of reliability. With k equals three replicas you
have six nines of reliability, and with k equals five replicas you
have ten nines of reliability. You can actually tune the number of
replicas you have based on the failure probability that you expect to get
the desired reliability from your system. So, what's the catch? All this seems great right? I mean replication seems
to give a lot of benefits. So, what is the hard part? Well, the hard part is to guarantee two
properties replication transparency and replication consistency. Replication transparency essentially says
that a client, any client should not be able to see that there are multiple copies
or multiple replicas of a given object. So, as far as the client is concerned
the replication should be invisible or transparent. That is the client should be able to
execute operations just like there is just one copy of each object
on the server side. The second application consistency is
similar but it's slightly different. Here it talks about multiple clients
seeing a consistent copy of the data, in spite of replication. So, in spite of the fact that the object
is replicated, you want multiple clients to always, perform operations as if
there is only one copy of the data. And whenever a client updates or
writes that the object, any replica of the object, all other
replicas get updated if possible, instantly, and if not instantly
at least as quickly as possible. So that before the next client
performs its operation, all the replicas are up to date. Replication consistency means something
stronger when you have transactions. Essentially means that you guarantee
the acid properties, which is adomicity, consistency, isolation, and durability that you've seen earlier in
our discussion on concurrency control. So how do you provide
replication transparency? Well, typically you provide
it using front ends. So you have multiple clients
think of these as for instance the clients accessing flight,
a flight reservation database. The replicas are storing information about
the objects, such as the flights, and you have a few front end servers. These might be front end servers
maintained at the data center or they might be front end servers maintained
at a content distribution network, CDN, or some series of proxy servers or
cash servers. Essentially the clients only
talk to the front end, so they don't see any replica groups or
any replicas of the objects. And the front end of them responsible for forwarding their requests to
the corresponding replica objects. Here I have an object oh that has
three replicas marked as replica one, replica two, and replica three. Whenever front end receives
a request from the client it then forwards
the request to the replica. And the replies come back from
the replica group to the front end and then back to the client
along the reverse path. Well what about replication consistency? Well there's two flavors to
providing replication consistency. They are known as passive replication and
active replication. In passive replication we
use a primary replica, also known as a master, or a leader. In after-in active replication
there is no leader, instead we use a fully distributed
approach among the replicas. We'll discuss each of these
approaches in the next few slides but both of these approaches use the concept
of replicated state machine. Well a state machine
some of you might know, is essentially a program or
a series or, or a, or a code which, when given a series of
inputs gives us the use of outputs. But for each input the internal state of
the state machine might change as well. So essentially, typically you have
a graph involving, states and transition, rules in between,
pairs of states. And whenever you receive
an input you have an output, but you will also transition, the state
machine from one state to another. Essentially replicated state
machine says that all the replicas of the given object are running the same
state machine or the same code. And when they're given an,
an identical series or an identical sequence of inputs at each
of those replicated State Machines, the series of states that those
State Machines go through is identical. Also, the series of
outputs is also identical. Fred Schneider, in 1990,
formalized this as follows. He said that,
replicated state machines refer to, multiple copies of the same state
machine begun in the start state, and receiving the same inputs in the same
order, will arrive at the same state, final state, having generated
the same series of outputs. And so that's,
essentially a replicated state machine. So now let's look at a passive
replication and an active replication. So in passive replication, the group
of replicas of object O elects one of, the replicas as a master or a leader. And for this it uses one of our
leader election protocols that you have seen earlier in the course. The front end's the variable
that receive an ob, a read or a write, they relay the operation
directly, to the master. And this ensures that for writes there
is a total ordering of all the writes or all, or, of all the updates. For reads,
some variance of passive replication allow the front ends to contact any
of the three replicas for the reads. And some other flavors of
passive replication directly reads as well through the master. As far as writes are concerned, they need to go through the master,
because the master then sends out the corresponding writes to
the other replicas inside the group. What happens when the master fails? Well, when the master fails, you again
run your leader election protocol. Whatever is your favorite leader election
protocol, and you elect a new master. In comparison to passive replication, active replication does not
use a master or a leader. Instead, each of the front ends
multicasts out the request, read or write to the entire replica group. Okay, so for this you can use
your own favorite multicast protocol that you've seen
earlier in the course. So the red arrows over here show
a multicast in, inside the replica group. Now as you know, multicasts come in different flavors
especially ordering flavors. So you can use any flavor of multicast
ordering depending on the application and you have seen earlier in the course,
flavoring. The flavors of ordering that are available
to you are FIFO ordering, causal ordering, total ordering, and hybrid ordering among
these two, among you know these three. So, if you use a total or
hybrid auditing with total, for some form of total ordering, along
with the replicate and state machines. Essentially means that all
the replicas are going to receive the same series of operations
in the same order. And that means the series of
states that transition through and the seats of outputs that they will output
will all be identical at all the replicas. It may not happen at the same instance of
physical time at all the replicas, but at least the ordering is the same. So what about failures? How do you incorporate
failures into this multicasts? Once again, as we have seen before
in our discussion of multicasts, you can use the concept or
abstraction known as virtual synchrony or view synchrony, which orders failures,
along with multicasts within the group. So if you use virtual synchrony
with total ordering for multicasts, essentially all the replicas
see all the membership changes, failures, joins or leaves in the same order. And also the multicasts in the same order,
and both of them, multicasts and fi-, and
the membership changes in the same order. Now you can use total ordering here. If your application is okay with
a slightly weaker form of ordering, which is causal ordering,
that might be fine, you can use that, too. Or even FIFO ordering if your application
is willing to live with that. What do you do with transactions
when you have replicated systems? Well, there is this concept
known as one copy serializable. Just like we studied serial
equivalence for transactions when we started concurrent congruency
control, in replication control for transactions there is a concept
known as one copy-serializability. What does it say? It says the following. A concurrent execution of transactions
in a replicated database is one-copy-serializable. So when I say concurrent
execution of transactions, I'm talking about multiple
clients executing transactions. Replicated database means that objects
have multiple replicas on the server side. So it's one copy serializable if it
is equivalent to a serial execution, but as a serial it means
a serial equivalence, all right? Execution of these transactions over
a single logical copy of the database. Okay, so it's as if you executed
these transactions one at a time over a database where there were, where
there was exactly one copy of each object. Okay, in other words this is the same that
the effect of the transactions performed by the clients should be the same as if
they had been performed one at a time on a single set of objects that
is one replica per object. Okay, so this essentially means serial
equivalents of the transactions, right, so that's what we're talking about here,
okay? So we want to have both serial equivalents
and one copy serializability, and one copy copy serializability appears to capture
this serial equivalence notion as well. So after this let's discuss how you
commit transactions when you have distributed servers on the sever side. [MUSIC]