Okay. With this lecture, we are going to start discussing how to let transactions satisfy the asset properties. And so, one of the first concepts we are going to discuss is known as Serial Equivalence. So, there are concurrent transactions where multiple clients are executing transactions with the same server, and we need to prevent transactions from affecting each other. One of the simplest ways of achieving this is to just allow one client at a time to execute a transaction with the server. So, a client comes in, acquires a lock on the server for instance, and then executes its transaction, and then once it's done, the second client comes in, and so on, and so forth. So this works as far as correctness is concerned, but it's pretty bad as far as performance is concerned. It reduces the number of transactions that are executing concurrently. And this is important because you want to allow more transactions to execute concurrently because it increases of transactions per second metric. The higher the transactions per second you can support, the higher is the revenue of the company. For instance, if a flight booking website had a very low transactions per second, clients would just not use it because it would be a very slow system that would not be able to support more than one user at one time. And so, you want to allow more concurrency. You want to maximize this metric, but at the same time, you also want to make sure that your system is correct. In other words, it maintains the asset properties. And so, that is a challenge overall in concurrency control. How do you increase the level of concurrency? How do you increase transactions per second? How do you allow more transactions and more transactions to execute concurrently while still not violating the asset properties for transactions? So then comes the concept of serial equivalence and interleaving of transaction operation. So you have two transactions and the operations that are interleaved in a particular order. This is the actual order in which the operations occurred in the server itself. That particular interleaving is said to be serially equivalent if and only if the following conditions are true. There is some other ordering of those transaction operations. So this is the original interleaving, maybe that is a different interleaving that looks like this. We call that interleaving as O prime, which gives the same end result as the original interleaving O. This means that the original interleaving O left the server objects in a particular state. And the fake make believe O prime ordering that we have also leaves the server objects in exactly the same state. So they're indistinguishable from that viewpoint. But in this new ordering O prime, you have the transaction operation such that all the operations of any given transaction are consecutively, meaning they are together in this interleaving. This means that essentially the interleaving O prime, the fake make believe interleaving has each transaction execute one at a time. So, a transaction comes in, and it executes its operations in a batch, and then the next transaction comes, and it executes operations in a batch and so on, and so forth. Because essentially, we are saying that in interleaving O, which happened in real life is serially equivalent, if there is a parallel world in which if transactions are executed one transaction at a time, then the end-result, as far as the servers are concerned, would have been the same as this original interleaving O. So, even though the transactions overlapped and even interfered and interleaved with each other, the end-result is the same as if the transactions that executed serially one transaction at a time. So the key here is that you are not able to distinguish the end-results of the two. And so, the interleaving is serially equivalent even though it's not actually serial. So how do you check for serial equivalence? Now, an operation has an effect on the server if the operation is a write. And so, the server object is then updated. Operation has an effect on the client, the return value, if the operation is a read. So we call these two as the effects of the operation depending on whether it's a write or a read. Now, two operations are said to be conflicting operations if their combined effect depends on the ordering which they executed. In other words, swapping their order will give you a different end-result as far as the servers or the clients are concerned. For instance, if I have a read operation on an object x and a write operation on the same object x, for instance, being executed by two different transactions, their ordering is going to make a difference. If the write came first, then the read will read this newly written value. However, if the read came first, then it will read the old written value. And so, the combined effect of these two operations really depends on the ordering which they are executed. Similarly, a write and a read on the same variable, which is essentially symmetric as a read and a write. Also, a write and a write are conflicting because, which a write comes second, that value is going to stay for a while. That's the over writing value. However, two reads on the same object are not conflicting because as long as these are the only two operations we're talking about, the order in which they occur, whether the second read comes before the first read or whether the first read comes before the second read, it doesn't really matter. The end-result is the same. The individual clients will get the same read value. So, swapping them doesn't really make a difference. And so, they are not conflicting options. Also, operations or two different objects, x and y, whether they read or a write, are not conflicting. Here, we assuming they're objects are, of course, independent of each other. But in that case, the operations of them are not conflicting because essentially objects don't interfere with each other. They are independent objects in and of themselves. So, now that we know what conflicting operations are, we can say what the conditions are under which two transactions are serially equivalent. So, given the transactions in a particular order of interleaving, that order of interleaving is said to be serially equivalent if and only if all pairs of conflicting operations, where the pair contains one operation from each transaction, is executed in the same transaction order for all the objects that the transactions access. What I'm just saying is the following: Suppose I have two transactions, the T1, T2, and a particular interleaving. I'm going to take all pairs of conflicting operations, where one part of the pair comes from T1, the other part comes from T2. If the T1 part of the pair was executed first in that particular interleaving, then I'm going to mark that pair as "(T1, T2)" because T1 part occurs first. However, if the T2 part of that pair occurs first in that interleaving, then I'm going to mark that as "(T2, T1)". You mark all the pairs of conflicting operations within the "(T1, T2)" or "(T2, T1)" in this way. And then, at the end, all these pairs should be marked as either all "(T1, T2s)" or all "(T2, T1s)". If either of these two conditions is true then, this particular interleaving is serially equivalent. Essentially, we're saying that it is equivalent to the case where if it's all "(T1, T2)"s then, it's equivalent to a case where the fake make believe scenario where T1 is executed completely first and then T2 executed. If there are some pairs which have "(T1, T2)" and other pairs that have "(T2, T1)", then these two transactions or other that interleaving is not serially equivalent. So we need to see this in action. So let's go back to the two problems we discussed in the previous lecture, which were giving us trouble. The first is the lost update problem. Here, two transactions, T1 and T2, were simultaneously trying to update a given variable, and one of their updates was getting lost and stop that seats going down from 10-8. It was only moved down from 10-9. So, what are all the conflicting options here? Remember that a conflicting operation pair has to be a read-write or a write-write pair on the same object. So, here's one example of a conflicting operation, transaction T1 writes to the object (ABC123) and transaction T2 reads from the object (ABC123). It's getSeats. So this is a read-write pair on the same object (ABC123). So that's a conflicting operation pair. And this operation pair has the T2 part of its pair occurring first in this particular interleaving. And so, we mark that as a "(T2, T1)" pair. So, are there other conflicting operation pairs? Well, here is another conflicting operation pair, a write-write pair on the same object (ABC123). So, again, here, you have the T1 part of the pair occurring first. And so, we marked this as "(T1, T2)". There is another pair of conflicting operations, which is the getSeats or a read on (ABC123) by T1 and the write on (ABC123) by T2. And once again, this is a read-write pair on the same object (ABC123). And the T1 part of the pair occurs first. So we mark that as "(T1, T2)". Here in this interleaving, you'll notice that there is one conflicting operation pair that has a "(T2, T1)" tag and another one, in fact two more, that have a "(T1, T2)" tag, and that is why this particular interleaving is not serially equivalent. And so, serial equivalents using the notion of conflicting operations catches the lost update problem in this way. What about the other problem that we discussed? The inconsistent retrieval problem. Here again, if you remember, a T1 was transferring five seats from one flight to another and T2 was trying to sum up the total number of seats, and it was reading partial results. So here, what are the conflicting operations? You'll notice that there is a lot of reads from these two objects, (ABC123) and (ABC789), and I'll get a lot of reads. These are not conflicting with each other because they are only read-read pairs even on the same objects. But you do have some conflicting pairs, the write on (ABC123) and the read on (ABC123) are conflicting. So the T1 part, the write, occurs first in this interleaving. So we marked that conflicting pair as "(T1, T2)". I'm not saying the write to (ABC789) and the read from (ABC789) from T1 and T2 respectively are conflicting pairs because this is a write-read pair. And here, the T2 part of the pairs occurs first. And so, we marked that as a "(T2, T1)" pair. And so, obviously, now you have a two pairs of conflicting operations in this particular interleaving, the first being a write-read pair that's mark as "(T1, T2)", the second being a write-read pair that is marked as "(T2, T1)". And so, this is not serially equivalent because we need all the conflicting operations marked as either "(T1, T2)" or all marked as "(T2, T1)". And so, a serially equivalent using the notion of conflicting operations also catches the inconsistent retrievals problem as we've seen here. So what can we do about this? At the commit point of the transaction, what you do is that you check for serial equivalence using conflicting operations. You check for serial equivalence using all the other transactions to the system. You don't need to check really a lot. We all know the transactions. You only need to check with other transactions that overlapped with transaction T, transactions that had some overlapping with some of the operations of transaction T, either transactions that already committed or transactions that are still going on. If you find that conflicting operation has violate serial equivalence, for instance, if the conflicting operation has violate serial equivalence and the other transaction involved is a transaction that is already committed, then you need to absolutely abort transaction T because you cannot undo a transaction that is already committed because you need to be ready and you want to make sure that a transaction that is committed has its updates reflected forever in the database. In that case, you would abort the transaction T. However, if the other transaction involve is a different transaction that has not yet committed, you might choose to abort that other transaction too because the choice is up to you. No matter what you do, if you abort a transaction, you need to make sure that you roll back or undo any of the writes that T made to the server objects so that the nothing property of the all or nothing is enforced and that T aborted and none of its updates were reflected on any of this oversight objects. But really, what we're noticing here is that transactions are aborting, and that means wasted work. So, the question arises, can you prevent violations from occurring at all?