[MUSIC] In this lecture we will see the first of
two types of techniques that are used for concurrency control, in other words, to make sure that transactions satisfy the
asset properties in spite of concurrency. So, these two approaches
are pessimistic concurrency control and optimistic concurrency control, okay? So, pessimistic, a pessimistic, approach,
or pessimistic approaches assume the worst, and they prevent transactions
from accessing, the same objects. So they prevent two transactions from
accessing the same object altogether. An example of pessimistic that we'll
discuss in more detail is locking. Optimistic approaches on
the other hand assume the best and they allow transactions to proceed as if,
you know, there are no conflicts that are occurring and as if
they would not interfere with each other. But at late, at a later point of time
the optimistic approach checks whether or not the asset is satisfied and
if it's not then it need to, abort. So multi-version and time-stamp
approaches which we'll discuss later on, all fall under the optimistic approaches. First pessimistic approach that we'll
discuss is known as exclusive locking. This is the simplest and the easiest. Each object is associated with a lock. And at most one transaction
can be inside a lock. When a transaction T wants to access an
object O, either for reading or writing. It needs to make sure that it cause,
lock, the lock(O) function. And the lock(O) will block if there is at
least one transaction inside the lock. When that transaction,
leaves the lock by calling on lock(O), then another transaction is allowed in. This ensures that, at most, one transaction has access
to the object O at any point in time. However once an object once a transaction
t has locked an object though it can then read and
write the object mold multiple times, it doesn't need to call lock every,
every time. So it can lock the,
lock the object once at its beginning and then do all its accesses and
then unlock it at its end. This should sound familiar to you because
this is very similar to the mission exclusion problem and
solution that we discussed earlier. In fact, you could use any of
those techniques here to implement exclusive locking. Okay, but that's going to add to what
we're discussing here because we are at the semantic level, or
the level of transactions over here. So once again concurrency's important
here because it means more transactions per second, and
it means more revenues for whoever, whichever is the company
running the server site. And exclusive locking has the problem
that it reduces concurrency, essentially. You know, you're, you're, you're, you're,
you're only limiting transactions to read so that plus one transaction
can read any object. In real life workloads
have a lot of read-only or read mostly transactions where
most of the operations are reads. And even there the exclusive
locking approach is, limiting these transactions to, read the
objects only one transaction at a time. But this is kind of not required,
because reads can read on concurrently, as you've already seen. Read, read conflicts in the same object
are really not conflicts at all, because they re, they return the same values no matter what
order they're op, they're executed in. So the hint again or the key here as we go
forward to the next approach is that it's okay to allow two transactions
to concurrently read an object Because read-read is
not a conflicting pair. But when writes come in you
need to be more careful. Okay, so that's the next approach which allows two different types
of locks on an object. Or rather the lock on an object can
be held in two different modes, the read mode or the write mode. As long as an a transaction is
holding an object in read mode, other transactions can also hold the lock
on the object in the same read mode. Which means that multiple transactions
can be allowed to be in the read mode. However when any transaction
is in the write mode,. No other transaction can be allowed in
either read mode or the write mode. This means that this is an exclusive lock. So, the operation is given out as follows. Before a transaction T
reads an object post, as opposed to reading an object code,
it calls read lock on both. The transaction T is allowed in if all
the other transactions that are inside the lock all are in
the read mode currently. If any transaction is in the write mode,
then T will have to wait. Now what does T do before
it writes object O? So it calls write_lock(O). Once again, write_lock succeeds our, the
transaction T is allowed past it if and only if no other transaction is
currently accessing the object, O, meaning it has not locked object O. If T already holds a read lock on object
O and it wants to now write object O, it can simply call write lock to
promote its lock from the read mode to the write mode, okay? Once again this succeeds only if no
other transactions are currently, in the, read mode or
in the write mode, okay? So both of these need to be true. Otherwise the promotion will block,
and T will block. Finally, when unlock is called
on the log by a transaction T, it releases all a locks,
no matter what modes they're in. So how do you get a serial
equivalence with these locks? That's, that's the whole goal, right? We want to make sure that asset
properties are satisfied and so. Therefore satisfied when, when
the serial equivalence is satisfied, but how do you ensure that the serial
equivalence is in fact satisfied? So, two phase locking is a very
popular technique that's used, to guarantee serial equivalence. Essentially two phase locking says
that a transaction can not acquire or promote any more locks after it
has started releasing locks. Essentially it says that
the transaction has two phases. The growing phase, where it only
acquires or promotes locks, and then a shrinking phase,
where it starts releasing locks. And once it starts releasing locks it
cannot acquire or promote any more locks. Okay, so that's two phase locking. You have a growing phase where you acquire
or promote locks, and then once you have gone, once you're done with that you have
a shrinking phase where you release locks. We research, we are talking of phases, these are phases that would occur inside
the transaction operations themselves, so each transaction has these phases
while it's executing its operations. There is a variant of two phase locking
known as strict two phase locking, where there is no shrinking phase, instead you release the locks only
when you reach the commit point. Okay, so there is the releasing of
the locks occurs only at one point, the commit point of the transaction. So, why does two phase locking, as we've discussed it,
guarantees serial equivalence? Well, the proof is by contradiction,
here is the proof. Assume we have a two phase locking system
where serial equivalence is violated for two transactions, T1 and T2. Because of the serial equivalence
definition, it must be true that there is some object O1,
where the conflicting operations in T1 and T2 are such that the tag on that
conflicting pair is T1 comma T2. And there's some object or two, maybe
the same object or one, maybe a different object where the conflicting operation
pair is the reverse, which is T2 comma T1. Now, because of the first T1 and
T2 pair and because of the way the two phase
locking works, the shrinking phase, or the growing phase first and
then the shrinking phase. T1 must have released O1's lock
in it's shrinking phase, and then T2 acquired the lock after that. Which means that T1's shrinking
phase is either before or overlaps with T2's growing phase, okay? That's just by definitions. But, then using the same
argument on B we can, we can argue that T2's shrinking phase, is before
or overlaps with T1's growing phase. However this cannot be true,
because you can't have both of these statements be true,
because growing phase only occurs before the shrinking phase in each transaction,
and that is the contradiction over here. So one of the downsides of
locking is deadlocks and so here is an example of a deadlock. So here are two transactions, T1 and T2,
they are trying to do similar things, but in slightly different orders. So, T1 is locking the object ABC123,
and then, it's writing to it, and then, it tries to lock object ABC789. T2, on the other hand,
locks the objects in a different order. It locks ABC789 first, and
then it tries to lock ABC123. And this is the interweaving
of these two transactions. Essentially, at this point,
Transaction T1 is trying to lock ABC789, it ends up waiting for Transaction T2
to release it's lock on ABC789. While here T2 ends up waiting for, the lock on ABC123 which is
currently being held by T1. At this point the transactions T1 and T2 are deadlocked,
each of them is waiting for the other. Okay, so this is shown by this wait for
graph where T1 is waiting for T2 to release the lock on object ABC789, and T2 is waiting for
T1 to release the lock on object ABC123. Okay, this is an example for
deadlock where these transactions T1 and T2 will not make anymore progress ever
at all unless you do something about it. Okay so deadlocks can happen in any
system that uses a locking approach. So when do deadlocks occur? There are three necessary conditions for
a deadlock to occur. When I say necessary, I mean that there is
a deadlock on the system, then these all, then these conditions are all
definitely true, okay? So these three conditions are as follows. Some objects are accessed in an exclusive,
an exclusive lock mode. Which means that when
a transaction accesses, some objects,
those objects are accessed so that no other transaction can access those
objects, so these are exclusive lock mode. For instance a right mode
is an exclusive lock mode. Second condition is that a transaction
holding a lock cannot be preempted. Okay, so a transaction doesn't necessarily
just give up its locks just like that. And third, most importantly,
there is a circular wait or cycle in the wait-for graph
that we have discussed. Okay, so we discussed a wait-for graph for
two transactions, but when you have thousands of transactions
involved, and transactions are waiting for each other to release locks. We can draw a wait for
graph among these transactions. If there's a cycle in the wait for
graph or a circle of, directed edges, then, you have a cycle and
you have a deadlock in the system. So, once again,
these conditions are all necessary, which means that if there's a deadlock
then these conditions are definitely true, however, they're not sufficient. If these conditions are true, it doesn't
guarantee that there is a deadlock, okay? It doesn't mean there is
definitely a deadlock, okay? So the sufficiency is not true,
the necessary is, is true. So how do you combat these deadlocks? Well, there is a few approaches
the first approach is lock timeout. When a transaction is not able to access
a lock for a while, it times out and it aborts the transaction. This could be expensive, of course,
once it locks, of course. It's expensive because transaction
aborts might become very frequent, and timeouts may occur even
when there's no deadlock. Because you know, the network might
just be slow, and transactions might be aborting just because they are facing
timeouts because of slow network. So different approaches to deadlock
detection, where you allow deadlocks to happen but you detect
the deadlocks when they do happen. Essentially here you keep track
of the wait-for graph for instance you keep track of it via
the global snapshot algorithm. You might recall the chandy lamport
algorithm which we discussed at the very beginning of this class, this course. And you could use a churney lampored
algorithm global times rather than to capture the wait for graph and
then detect cycles in it. Okay, for
instance you could do this periodically. If you do find a cycle, then you need to
abort one or more transactions in that cycle to break that cycle, and to ensure
that there is no deadlock in the system. However, this still allows
deadlocks to occur. So a transaction might still end up
waiting when they're in a deadlock before the next Global snapshot
algorithm is run and cycle is broken. So, a third approach that comes
in is deadlock prevention, which completely prevents deadlocks by
violating one of the necessary conditions. Note that we said necessary conditions, means that these conditions are absolutely
required for deadlock structures. If you violate any one of
the necessary conditions, just one of them, is violated, that's
sufficient for you to, that's enough for you to ensure that deadlock
will not happen in the system. For instance, the first condition said
that some objects are accessed in exclusive lock modes. This can be violated by ensuring,
for instance, that all objects are accessed in read-only modes, meaning
you don't have any exclusive locks. So in a database where all ob, where
objects cannot be written at all, where objects can only be read, you can never
have deadlocks because the first condition is violated, the first necessary condition
is violated and it is never true. Let's go the next condition. Next condition says the transactions
holding locks cannot be preempted. Well, you can allow transactions to be
preempted, all transactions too, for instance, time out when
they're waiting for locks. Again, this would prevent
deadlocks from happening. The third condition says that there is a
circular wait in the wait-for graph, okay? So this can be implemented
by the following approach. There are many other approaches that can
be used too, to violate this condition but here is one condition, one approach. A transaction locks all the subjects, all
the subjects in the beginning, so it knows all the objects that it is going to lock
up front at its open transaction time. And it tries to lock all
of them at the beginning, if all these locks succeed then it
proceeds, then the transaction proceeds. If any one of these, if at least
one of these lock attempts fails, then the transaction aborts immediately,
okay? Because in this approach a transaction
hour waits for other transactions to release the locks because either you
access all your locks or you don't. You never have any edges in
your wait-for graph, and so you don't have any cycles
in your wait-for graph. Because if you don't have any edges,
you don't have any cycles. And so this approach would end
up preventing deadlocks as well. So we discussed the pessimistic
concurrency control approach we'd use as locks, but it's still limiting, right? There, there are still times when some
transactions are having to wait for other transactions if
you still use locking. And so concurrency is still not as
high as we would want it to be. And you can make it even higher by
using Optimistic Concurrency Control, which we'll discuss in the next lecture. [MUSIC]