[MUSIC] In the topic of concurrency control,
which the next lecture series focuses on one of the most
important building blocks is RPCs. So in this lecture we'll
see what an RPC is, and how RPCs are implemented in systems today. RPC stands for Remote Procedure Call. And it was proposed by Birrell and
Nelson in the early 1980s. They wrote a paper about it but
it's not just limited to a paper, it's an important abstraction that is
implemented in many distributed systems today and
most cloud computing systems, not all. RPCs are an important
abstraction that allow processes to call functions in other processes. So, if you have function in a process P1,
another function in a process P2 normally you would not be able to
call one function from the other, from the other but
RPCs allow you to do this. As a result, RPC is enable a code reuse. So if someone writes for instance
a library for a special data structure, then you can call the functions
of the library by using RPCs. RPCs stand for remote procedure call. They have a counterpart in object based
systems, known as RMIs, which transfer remote method invocation, where one
method is called from another method. So before we discuss what an RPC is, we need to discuss what a local
procedure call is, or and LPC is. In a local procedure call you
have a calling function and a called function, and both these
functions share the same address space. They lie within the same process. This means that the stack of that process, because the process has only one stack,
the, the stack can be used to pass arguments from the calling
function to the call function. When the call function is done, it can then pass the return values
back along the stack again. Also, because these functions share
the same process address space, they can access common objects. Example via pointers if you're using C. Or by reference, for instance,
if you're using Java. Now LPCs, or local procedure calls,
have exactly-once semantics. This means that as long as the process
which contains the two functions does not crash the call function
will be executed exactly once. Not zero times, not more than one time,
but exactly one time. And this is important to discuss here,
because when we discuss RPCs you'll see that the semantics
may be slightly different. So what is an RPC, or
a remote procedure call? While an LPC, a local procedure call,
had both the calling and the call function within the same process,
in an RPC the caller and the calling functions
are in different processes. This means that the function call
from one function to another crosses a process boundary,
goes from one process into another. This means that we need to ob,
access objects via global references. You cannot use pointers anymore. Pointers essentially refer to
virtual memory addresses within that process' address space. An address of say, 1,234, in process P1,
may refer to completely, something completely different, a different
object in process P2's address space. So you can't really use pointers as-is to
access objects across process boundaries, because the address spaces are different. And so you need to have global references
if you want add access objects. For instance, a global reference may be
the IP and port number of the process containing the object,
along with the object number itself. This uniquely identifies the object and
this allows functions to pass, essentially, global references
to other functions. You have RPC and similarly you have RMI, or remote method
invocation, in object-based settings. Where caller method and callee method
are in different process address spaces. So vectorially, you have a process P1. It has a main function. It has two other functions, f1 and f2. It's main call is f1, that's an LPC. Or a local procedure call. F1 might then call f2, which again is
an LPC, or a local procedure call. These are LPCs because they stay
within the same process address space. They use a process stack. However, if I have a second process P2,
which has its own address space and that has another function f2 then this function f2 will be called
by the f1 function in process P1. That will be an RPC or
a remote procedure call. Both these process might
reside on the same host. In which case it's still
a remote procedure call. Notice that the remote procedure call
here does not cross host boundaries. It stays within the same host. But because it crosses process boundaries,
because it crosses over from process P1 into another process P2,
it is still an RPC. Or the two processes might
be on different hosts. In which case you might need
messages that go over the network. One message carries the request, which is essentially carrying
the arguments of the of the call itself. That's the RPC request message. And when the RPC is done the RPC
reply message is then carried back to the calling process P1. So what about the semantics? So we discussed exactly-once semantics for
NPCs and we would really desire those for RPCs as well, however they turn
out to be very hard to guarantee in RPCs primarily because networks,
as you know, are failure prone. The request call message might be dropped
or the return message might be dropped. The difference between these two is that,
in one case the called function was never executed, in the first case
where the request message was dropped. In the second case, where the reply
message was dropped, it was executed. However, from the calling process
viewpoint, these two scenarios are indistinguishable, all it knows is
that it does not hear a reply back. Also, other failure modes could happen. For instance, the call process might
fail before executing the call function. Or the call process might fail
after executing the call function. These cases are generally very hard to
distinguish by the caller function, or the caller process. And so that's what leads to a little
bit of ambiguity in terms of semantics. Also the network might be duplicating
messages, so if the request message is duplicated this means that the call
function might be executed multiple times. And you might have more
than one execution. So RPCs typically support
three flavors of semantics, at most once semantics which is
supported by the Java RMI system, at least once semantics which is supported
for instance by the Sun RPC system, and maybe semantics which
are supported by the CORBA system. So these names mean exactly what they say. At most once means that
you're guaranteed that a call function will be executed either zero or
one times, no more than one time. At least once says that
a call function will be, will be executed at least one time,
but not zero times, eventually. And maybe it doesn't really
give you any guarantee, it's essentially a best
effort kind of behavior. How do you implement these? Well, let's look at different
ways to implement this. So, there are three different design
decisions that you can make in order to implement these different flavors. First, if the calling function
does not hear back a response, say within a time out,
it might want to retransmit the request. Second on the call function side,
if you share a duplicate request, a request that you've already seen before,
do you simply filter it out? Or do you, again,
pass it on just like another request? And third when you receive
a duplicate request, do you re-execute the function
the call function? Or do you simply retransmit the old reply? Okay. So if you retransmit the request,
that's the first column we're looking at. First row we're looking at here. If you retransmit the request but you do
not filter duplicates and then simply re-execute the procedure, this guarantees
that if the ca, both the call, the caller and the callee are alive, then eventually
at least one request will make it across. And, it will be executed
at least one time. Okay, because your re-executing
the procedure here, you're not guaranteed that it
will be executed exactly once. But, you are guaranteed that eventually
at least one execution will happen if things go right. Let's look at the second row. If your retransmit the request, but you
filter out duplicate requests, which means that you don't re-execute the procedure
but you simply retransmit the reply. Then this guy thinks that eventually wo, you know when messages do make it
across from the caller to the callee this function will be executed but
it will be executed at most once. You are not guaranteed that it will
be ever executed because you're not guaranteed that things will
ever go right in the network. But if they do,
then it will be executed at most once. But no more than one time because
you're filtering all duplicates and not re-executing the procedure. Finally, if you don't retransmit the
request and you really don't do anything on the callee side either,
then this leads to maybe semantics. So, this is the three
flavors of semantics in RPCs. Some kinds of operations,
known as idempotent operations, can be repeated multiple times
without having any side effects. Some example of such
operations include x equals 1. Whether you execute this
operation one time, twice, or a million times,
the end result is the same, x is set to 1. There are no side effects. Similarly, if an RPC call is provided an
argument y, which has the same value for each invocation. And if x is set to y then
the end result is the same. Whether this RPC is executed once,
twice, or ten times. There are no side effects. Some examples of operators that are not
that important are increment operations similarly decrement operations. For an increment operation to be executed
once then x is incremented by one. But if you call it multiple times, then
x might be implemented multiple times. And so it has side effects. So this is not an item for
idempotent operations. Similarly, multiplying x by 2, is
an operation that has different results, whether it is executed once or twice or
some multiple number of times. While we are discussing this, what idempotent operations are useful
to be used with at least one semantics? If you have an idempotent operation that
is inside an RPC, or rather, if an RPC consists of only idempotent operations,
if the entire RPCs idempotent, then an RPC call semantics that is in at-least-once
semantics play as well with such an RPC. You can implement at least once semantics. And no matter how many
times the RPC is called, the end result would be the same
without having any side effects. So how do you implement these RPCs? So here is an architecture how,
of how RPCs are typically implemented. On the caller process,
we call it the client. There's a client stub then
lots of communication module. On the caller, on the callee process, also, also called our server
there is a communication module, there is a dispatcher, a server stub and
then the final callee function itself. Really what we want to have is for the caller function to be able to
make a call to the callee function. And the reply or the response on
the return values to be returned back. And so as you notice here the caller
actual calls the client stub which then passes on the request to
the communication module, which then communicates with the
communication module on the server side, and then that talks to the dispatcher,
and then the server stub, and then the callee, and then the response
is passed back along the reverse path. So what are all these modules? Let's look at them one by one. The client stub has the same
function signature as the callee. Okay, so we're talking about
this function down here. For the signature, or interface, of this
function is the same as the client stub. This is nice because it
allows the caller to call the callee function just like
it was a local function. The caller does not need to know
that the callee function is not residing in process P1. It is calling a function that
just looks like a process that looks like the calling function. Think of a clone that essentially looks
like you but has, is empty inside. But when someone tells something
to the clone it immediately relays the message to you. Okay, that's a client stub. The communication module is responsible
simply for request supply messages. So it simply forwards a request and
replies for appropriate hosts, both on the client side and
also on the server side. On the server side you
have the dispatcher. When the dispatcher receives a request
from its communication module it then needs to select the server stub. The appropriate server stub
to forward the request to. And the server stub would then call the
callee and then the callee started returns the return values while P2's local stat
to the server's stub itself which then transfers it back while the dispatcher
all the way back to the caller itself. Just to let you know, the dispatchers
need because it might be multiple callee functions at process P2 that
are being called by different clients at, at different parts of the system. And so you need the dispatcher to
decide which callee function to call. The server stub is needed on a per-callee
function basis so that the callee function has someone to return the return
values to via its local stack. How do you generate the code for these? Well, do you generate the code,
do you write the code for all of these components? Well, the answer is no. The programmer only needs to write
code for the caller function and the callee function. Everything else in between
is generated automatically. Typically these are generated
automatically from the function signatures or object interfaces if you're
using object-based languages. For instance in the Sun RPC system there
is a language called the Sun XDR or which is used for presenting interfaces. So when you write RPCs and Sun RPC system, you would specify the signatures
of those functions Sun XDR. Then Sun XDR system will use these
to generate code automatically for all the components except the caller and
the callee function. So the clients stop,
the remote communication module, the dispatcher, the service side stub,
all are generated automatically from just the interface definitions and
the signatures of these functions. All of these components form
a part of the Middleware system, so CORBA which is common object request
brokerage architecture is an example of a Middleware system that supports RPCs. And the Sun RPC and the Java are my
other Middleware systems, as well. Now, there's an important
topic when you discuss RPCs, which is known as marshalling. Marshalling is needed because different
architectures use different ways of representing data. And yet you want to be able to make
RPCs across these different platforms. So for instance you might have an Intel
architecture running the caller function process, and an IBM Z architecture
running the callee function process. And you want to be able to allow RPCs to happen across these two
different architectures. However, these architectures use
different ways of representing data, typically especially integers. There are two popular ways of
representing data, or storing data, in the architecture. They are known as big endian and
little endian. These terms come from Jonathan Swift's
famous novel called Gulliver's Travels. Where Gulliver travels
to the land of Lilliput. And the tra, the land of
Lilliput has small inhabitants, really, really tiny inhabitants,
and they fight wars. They ha, there are two nations in the land
of Lilliput where they fight wars based on whether they should break an egg from
the little endian side or from the big endian side and that's where the number
comes from, where these names come from. So the big endian architectures would
store numbers as follows if you have a hex number, that is 12 ac 33, then it
puts toward 12 in the lowest address. Then AC in the next higher address,
and then 33 in the highest address. Okay, if you had longer integers,
they are stored in the order shown here. So the IBM z architecture, the System 360,
all of these use big endian format. The little endian format is reverse. So, a hex 12-AC-33 is stored within
the 33 byte in the lowest address, then AC in the next highest address,
and then 12. Okay, here we are using
byte level addressing. Endian architectures for instance
follow the little endian architectures. This is why a lot of windows machines
tend to be little endian here. So this means that the caller process uses
its own platform dependent way of storing data and
the callee process does the same as well. And the middle when
the middleware is responsible for translating between these two. The middleware typically has
a common data representation format, this is the platform independent platform
that is chosen only by the middleware. They call this is the CDR. And the marshalling is the process of the
caller process converting the arguments of the request message
into the CDR format. So it takes documents which are stored
in its own platform dependent format and converts it into the platform independent
format that's specified by the middleware. This is the process of marshalling. But then it can be packaged
into the request message and sent over to the server side or
the callee side. The callee process on the other hand
extracts the arguments from the message and converts it into its own
platform dependent format. Otherwise it will not be able to pass
it to the callee function itself. Okay.
This process of extracting the platform-independent format
into the platform-dependent format is known as unmarshalling. Kay, so this is the reverse. Similarly, when the callee function is
done it will marshall its return values into the reply message and then the caller
function would then unmarshal the r, the reply values from at the from
the response messaging side. So now that we know RPCs is a build,
as a building block, we can use them to understand
the concept no less transactions, and that's what we'll do in the next lecture. [MUSIC]