[MUSIC] In this lecture, we're going to discuss
optimistic concurrency control, which tries to increase
the level of concurrency or transactions per second compared to
pessimistic concurrency control. And this is important
because it improves revenue. It improves the operations per second and
it lowers latency. And these are important in
non-transactions systems. So systems like Dropbox,
Google Apps, Wikipedia, Key-value Stores yh, Amazon's Dynamo. All of these even though they don't
support transactions necessarily they prefer optimistic concurrency control
approaches, because it reduces latency and increased concurrency. Meaning it,
it improves operations per second. Optimistic concurrency control in
general is preferable over pessimistic concurrency control when
conflicts are expected to be rare. But when conflicts do occur,
you need to make sure that they are caught and resolved if necessary. So the most basic approach to optimistic
concurrency control is to just allow transactions. Were are going to be
discussing the transaction version of optimistic concurrency control. You just allow transactions and
clients to read and write objects at will. When the transaction tries to comment,
you check for serial equivalence. If it's violated,
then you abort the transaction and roll back in the updates that it made. Now an abort by transaction may
result in other transactions that dread dirty data from this
transaction also being aborted, because that data was never
ever reflected based on a. Those were the transactions that read the
dirty data by an aborted transaction you also need to abort. But those transactions may have written
data, which may have been read by other transactions and those transactions now
transitively also need to be aborted. As a result transaction aborts
are a little bit tricky, because one transaction abort
might lead to a series of other cascading aborts of other
transactions as well. So a second approach that tries to improve
on this is known as timestamp ordering. This is used by several databases. Each transaction is assigned an id
that's called the transaction ID. The transaction id determines that, that transaction's position
in the serialization order. So you want to make sure that you have
a serial equivalents order that obeys a transaction id ordering. When a transaction t is used in operation, you need to make sure that
two conditions are true. T's write to an object O is allowed,
only if transactions that have previously read or written that
object O had lower id's than T. Okay?
That's the first condition that needs to be satisfied. Second condition is that if T
is trying to read an object O, that is allowed only if O was last written
by a transaction with a lower id than T. Okay.
So, if these two conditions are, are satisfied, then you can ensure that
the transactions, even though they interweave their operations follow the
serialization order and then the resulting is serially equal aligned and
the ordering is the serialization order. Typically, timestamp ordering is
implemented by maintaining read and write time stamps for the object. And whenever any of these two rules is
violated for a transactions operation, then that transaction is aborted. So this works with serial equivalence,
but still you're resulting, you're still causing
transactions to abort over here. Right? You don't have cascading aborts anymore
here necessarily because the transaction only aborts and that's it. Or at least the trans the cascading
aborts are minimized over here, because the transaction
can still abort and other transactions can can be
customized abort because of it. But the, the aborts are minimized
compared to the previous approach that we discussed in the previous slide. But essentially, what I'm saying here
is that you still have abort and you might want to do better than this. So third approach is known as
multi-version concurrency control. This is used in several systems, including
some key-value store systems like the. Here, for each object you maintain a per
transaction version of the object. Right. And so each transaction maintains its
own tentative version of that object. You also have a committed version,
which is meeting on the server side, on the database side. Each tentative version has
a timestamp of its own and the committed version
also has a timestamp. Some variance some systems
implement both read and write timestamp for the tentative version. Whether a transaction wants
to do a read or a write, you need to find the correct tentative
version to read or write from. And this correctness which is the correct
version to choose from is based on the transaction id, so
you want to make sure that you read only from transactions
that were immediately previous writers. And so you choose your point in
the transaction in, among the versions of that object and you choose the right
version to read and write from. Okay. So this is only the sort of high
level overview of multi-version concurrency control. We are not discussing its all
its gory details over here. Now eventual consistency that
we have seen in key-value stores is in fact a form of optimistic
concurrency control. Cassandra key value store we have seen,
in DynamoDB key-value store and also in the VF key-value store. But these systems are,
not transaction systems. So the optimistic
approach looks different. In fact,
it looks slightly simpler in some ways. So, in Cassandra and DynamoDB, there's only one version of each
data item, each key-value pair. That's what we would call an object. And you have a last-write-wins or
last-writer-wins policy, which is LWW. Essentially, the timestamp, typically
based on physical time is used to determine whether to
overwrite the older value. If the new write's timestamp is higher,
then the current object's timestamp, you overwrite. Otherwise, you do nothing and
you ignore the that write. So ensures eventual consistency, which
means that eventually you end write stop all, all the replicas will
reflect the same value, which is the latest timestamp write. But you could have situations where
a slightly older write with a fresher time stamp, because of unsynchronized
clocks in a disable system. A slightly older write with a fresher
timestamp might in fact win and so the last-writer-wins really is based
on the notion as physical time and some notion of time
synchronization across clients. A different approach used in the Riak
key-value store uses vector clocks. And you should be familiar with
vector clocks, because you've studied them in the first half of the course
when we discussed lampo time stamps and then vector clocks. This notion implements causal ordering and
these vector clocks are used to detect whether a new write is
strictly newer than the current value. If the vector clock value
is strictly greater than. Or if it's not compatible, then the new write might conflict
with the old existing value. If there's a conflict,
then you create a sibling value. Meaning you, you maintain for
that key two values. Saying that these are two
possible values for this key. These are sibling values. These are results, these need to
be resolved at some point of time, they could be resolved by the user. You could bubble them up to the client or
the user, which then picks one value and then does it right using that value and
overwrites the existing values with a newer time stamp or it could
result automatically by the application. So in any case, these are not
resolved by the react system itself. They are pushed out to the client either
by the user or by the application itself. The Riak uses vector clocks and
the vector clocks might get very large, because the number of entries
in the vector clock is potentially the same as
the number of clients. And to do prevent a vector clock
from getting too many entries, you you use sideways pruning,
you typically prune the number of entries, the maximum number of entries that
can be there in the vector clock. Also vector clocks might get very old, some entries might have very old
items vector clock values in them. And so to prevent that from happening,
you prune out you remove entries that have
very old time stamps in them. So to wrap up our discussion of
concurrency control we first discuss RPCs and RMIs, remote procedure calls and
remote method invocations, which are important building blocks in
understanding what transactions are. Transactions are one of the most
important concepts in database systems that have been used for many decades. For transactions,
you need to maintain asset properties and to maintain asset properties serial
equivalence is a very important technique. And typically, this is detected and
enforced by a conflicting operations. And there is two ways or two approaches in
which you can do concurrency control, so that serial equivalence
is still maintained. The first is pessimistic
concurrency control such as locking which limits concurrency,
but is always correct. Optimistic concurrency
control lets transactions to proceed with their reads and
writes under certain conditions. But checks later on or
enforces checks at some point of time so that the asset properties and serial
equivalence are in fact always obeyed. [MUSIC]