[MUSIC] All right,
we have completed our deep dive and now we start to come
back up to the surface. In these last three weeks of C3 Part 2, the remaining weeks, you will see topics
that fall into one of three categories. These are topics that are either hot
topics in cloud computing or orthogonal but related topics and also we'll see
a few important classical concepts. In hot topics, our goal is not to explain
the entire hot topic to you, but to get you jump started with a particular topic
so that you have enough information to explore it by yourself either on the web
or by trying out some of those systems. We'll see some orthogonal
related topics as well, which are not necessarily disparate
algorithms, but are related to distributed systems that are on the peripheries or
interact with distributed systems. And so it's important for
all distributed systems and cloud systems people to
know what these topics are. And then we'll also see a few
more important classical topics, which fall under core concepts. So in this week, week three, we'll seem
some hot topics which include stream processing such as Apache Storm, we'll
see distributed graph processing where you process very large graphs such as
a Facebook graph or the web graph. In stream processing, we'll see how large
amounts of data that are streaming, in such as a Twitter stream,
are processed in real time. You see Apache Storm,
which has been used for processing some of these new,
some of these streaming data. Once again, our goal here is to get
a jump start with these topics so that you can explore
them later by yourself. In orthogonal topics, we'll see structure
of networks, how networks look. Networks is not something
that we study in this course, but they are of course something that
distributed systems interact with. After all, a network is something that
a distributed system sends and receives messages via, so it's important to know
the characteristics of these networks so you can better design distributed systems. I would study a little bit of scheduling
which is an important topic that is a core concept in distributed systems. [MUSIC]