[MUSIC] Hi there. In this lecture, we're going to
see some very interesting and cool properties of networks or
graphs as you have seen them. So before we get started,
a few definitions again. What is a network or a graph? A network or
a graph are synonyms by the way. So a network or
a graph has vertices or nodes. For instance, in the Facebook graph,
each user is a vertex. In the Internet graph,
each router or switch is a vertex. There are edges that
connect pairs of vertices. In the Facebook graph,
a friend relationship between you and one of your friends is an edge. Similarly, in the Internet graph,
the link joining to switches in the Internet
constitute an edge in that graph. So there are networks of
graphs all around us. The Internet of course is one of
the largest networks that we use. The World Wide Web is a network
where the vertices are webpages and the edges joining them are links that
point from one web page to another. This is often called the directed graph
as the edges are uni directional. They're also social networks such
as Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn, which are all networks where the users are
vertices, and the friend relationships or the connections are edges. And of course a biological graph
such as DNA interaction graphs, ecosystem graphs, and of course all
of these are networks, as well. So there's a variety of networks and
all these networks are fairly complex. They have different kinds of complexities. The first kind of complexity
is structural complexity. For instance, the human social
network has about 7 billion. That's a number of people alive in
the world as of this year 2014. There are millions of
computers on the Internet. The graphs, or the networks,
as a result of these large numbers of vertices are also
structurally very, very complex. These networks evolve over time. And they don't look the same now
as they did one year ago, and they don't look the same now as
they will one year from now. And this is because people
make friends all the time. New people are born, people die,
relationship change overtime. In the Internet,
the ISPs change hands all the time, so the links on the Internet changes as well. And of course in the World Wide Web,
as you know, new pages that are created as well as new edges and
new links are added all the time. There's a lot of diversity even
inside any one of these graphs. Inside the human social network for
instance, some folks are more popular than others, so
they might have more friends than others. In the World Wide Web, some websites
may have many more links than others, they have many more links pointing
to them than other websites do. For instance, the BBC website
has many more links pointing to it than your or
my personal homepage does, likely. And of course, the vertices in
these networks are fairly complex. In the Internet graph,
the endpoints, the routers and switches have different kinds of CPUs,
they're running different kinds of OSs. And these OSs themselves
have a lot of complexity. And of course human beings in
the human social network are very complex individuals as well. And even though you might be able to
represent each of these vertices by a few simple rules, when you put a large number
of these vertices together in a network, you get some very complex,
global behaviors. These are often called
as emergent phenomena. So, even from simple end vertex behavior,
and end edge behavior, which are governed by simple rules, you might
get very complex system-wide behavior. One of the best examples
of this is climate change. So, you could represent
climate change as a network, where the weather is different
points on the globe. And the edges are causatical
relationships between them. And really we do understand all
the basics of climate change, for instance, wind flows from high
pressure to low pressure. The rainfall happens when there's
lower pressure and so on and so forth. And yet, weather, it's kind of hard to
predict, and that's precisely because it's an example of an emergent phenomenon where
even though you know the simple rules, you aren't necessarily able to predict
the emergent global behaviors when you put all of these tools together
in a very large complex system. So, these networks have a lot of structure
in the sense that many of these networks, you are able to reach one node
from another in just a few hops. For instance, there is this well
known myth, actually almost a fact, known as six degrees of Kevin Bacon. In this case, if you draw the actor graph,
if you use the Internet Movie Database, IMDB, and if you represent each actor or
actress by a vertex in the graph, and an edge joining two actors if those actors
have acted together in at least one movie, then it can be shown that any actor
can be reached from Kevin Bacon, the word extrapolated into
Kevin Bacon within six hops. You can take just six jumps,
one over each edge, and reach any actor from Kevin Bacon. Milgram, a researcher assigned
to research at Stanford, did an experiment in the 1970s
which showed that the human social network separates any pair of human
beings with just a few edges. Typically, it's, again,
only six degrees of separation, where there are an expected number
of six hops between any two individuals in the world, no matter how
far or how unrelated they happen to be. And so the actor network,
the human network, and also other networks such as the World
Wide Web, the human social networks that are in real online social networks such
as Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn, peer-to-peer overlays,
electric power grids, protein networks. A lot of these shared this
common characteristics, where you can reach any node from any
other node within just a few hops. Just six hops or so. So, why is this? We should be wondering why this is. And one of the common characteristics
among all these networks is that they evolve naturally. It's not been the case that
someone has come along and said, hey here's how the network is going to be,
now and forever. Instead these networks started small and
then they evolved over time. All of these,
whether it's the World Wide Web, whether it's a human social network or
whether it's the electric power grid, they evolved, whether it's evolution
over a few years or over a few decades. And in the case of Facebook or
in the case of the electric power grid, or as in the case of human social network,
evolution over many, many centuries and millennia. A lot of these are small world networks. Here I'm introducing a new term,
a very interesting and very popular term called
small world networks. We need to see exactly what they are. Before we see small world networks, let's see two important matrix that
we can use to characterize networks. They are called clustering coefficient and
path length. Let's do the path length first. The path length is something that you've
already seen so far in our discussion. Path length essentially is, if you take
any pair of vertices in the graph, you take the shortest
path in between them, the shortest number of vertices you need
to jump from one to reach the other. That's the path length
of that vertex pair. You calculate this path length for
every pair of vertices and you take the average among them, that's
the path length of the entire graph, or the average path length in that graph or
network. So the longer the path length is, the more
spread out the network is, in a sense. And the shorter the path length is,
the more clustered the network is. But clustering is captured by a different
metric, known as a clustering coefficient, also abbreviated as CC. This defines something like the following,
given three word, this is A, B, and C. If there's an edge between A and C,
given an edge between A and C, and given an edge between C and B. That is A and B are common neighbors at C. What is the probability that A and
B are also connected to each other? In other words,
C has two friends, A and B. What is the probability that C's two
friends are also friends of each other? That is a clustering coefficient. This is a probability, so
it has values between zero and one. If the values is zero, then it means essentially this is
a very highly unclustered graph. For instance, tree networks have
a clustering coefficient of zero. However, if it has a clustering
coefficient of 1.0, the highest value possible, then it means
that this is a highly clustered network. For instance, a complete graph where
every vertex is joined every other vertex is an example of a graph that
has a 1.0 clustering coefficient. But different graphs lie different points
on the spectrum of clustering coefficient and path length. First, if you take the ring graph,
the graph that you have seen when we discussed a peer to peer systems and
distributed hash tables before. You did the ring graph and you add a few
successors and predecessors to each vortex, you got a graph that has
a very high clustering coefficient. Because if you have two neighbors, they're
likely also to be neighbors of each other because they're likely to be successor and
predecessor as well, but it has very long paths. If you have n vertices in your network,
then the paths are on average n in length. On the other hand, if you draw a random
graph where the edges are added between random pairs of vertices, this can
be shown to have a very low clustering coefficient, but
it has really short paths. So the paths in between any pair of
orders are very short in general. So ideally, you know what we are used
to in the human social network is high clustering coefficient. The fact that two of your friends are also
likely to know each other, but also very short paths as we have discussed from
Milgram's experiments and the 60 degrees of separation that you can reach any
other human being within just a few hops. That is what is characterized
by the small world networks, which have a high clustering
coefficient and short paths. So, the reason I discuss
the extended ring graph and the random graph is that you can actually
show how to read some types of small world networks by using these
two types of graphs. Specifically, you take an extended ring
graph which has very structured edges and you take one edge at a time and
you make their edge point to random notes. Okay, so you don't change the number of
edges, but you take one edge at a time and make it point across
random pairs of notes. What happens as a result of
doing that is that, eventually, you have changed all the edges to being
random, you get to a random graph, right? So, you go from an extended ring graph
to a random graph, and a result, the clustering coefficient, which is
very high for extended ring graphs, falls to very low for random graphs, and
the path length also reaches very high for extended ring graphs also falls
to be very low for random graphs. But these two things, the clustering
coefficient and path length, don't fall at the same rate. In fact, the clustering
coefficient falls much slower. It stays stable for much longer as
you move from the ring graph to random graph while the path
length falls very quickly. In other words, if you change just a few edges in your
extended ring graph to be random edges, the path length falls very quickly because
now a lot of the sharp paths will grow by these random edges because they join
very disparate portions of the graph. So you get these region of networks in
between the ring graphs and the random graphs which have a very high clustering
coefficient as high as an extended ring graphs but have a very short path
length almost has low as random graphs. And that is the region
of small world networks. Once again, this is not all
the small world networks that exist. This is one particular class of
small world networks that exist. But essentially, this is a way of deriving
small world networks which have this high clustering coefficient and short path
length characteristic as we are used to in the separation and
in the human social network. So small world networks are all around us. The network of actors is
a small world network. The network of humans is
a small world network. All online social networks
such as Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn are small world networks. Many of them have been shown by
measurements to be small world networks. And the co-authorship network
where vertices are researchers and edges between researchers, joint
researchers have co-authored at least one paper together is an example
of a small world network. In fact,
there is number where that between a famous scientist and
you in the correlation network. The worldwide Internet,
all of these are examples of small word which have a very high coefficient,
and yet have a very short. And many of these networks have
grown incrementally, and in fact, they can be modeled by using
a preferential model of growth where you add vertices sequentially or. When you add a vertex to a graph, you add
some edges and you add from an existing vertex v with a probability proportional
to the number of neighbors of v. So the number of neighbors of v
already has is proportional to the probability with which v will
be added to the newly added vertex. So if you use the you can actually show
that you end up with small word networks. So we've discussed small world networks
and we discussed it a little bit. Let's change that a little bit and
we'll come back to small world networks. Let's change that a little bit and
discuss degree. The degree of a given vertex in a graph or a network is essentially the number
immediate one hop neighbors. So if a vertex has three edges,
then its degree is three. So the degree distribution in a network or a graph is the probability
that a given node has k edges. There are different kinds
of degree distributions. You can have a regular graph where all the
nodes have exactly identical degrees or Gaussian distribution. Or you can have a random
graph with an exponential distribution where the probability that the vertex have k edges is e power minus k
x c where c is a constant, some constant. And, of course, you have a power log graph
which says that the probability that you have a k edges incident on you as
a vertex is proportional to k power minus alpha where alpha is a constant. This is a very interesting distribution,
because when k is pretty small, like one, two or three,
this probability is very high. But as k increases,
this probability drops off very quickly. So there's a very large number of
vertices that have very low degrees, but there are a few vertices that
have very high degrees as well. So how do you represent this? Well, this can be represented by
what is known as the log plot. This is a well-known plot. Here, you represent the no degree
on the exact sys, instead, what you plug is the logarithm
of the node degree. So you notice that the values of node
degree go exponentially up, 1, 10, 100, 1000, rather than 1, 10, 20, and 30. And on the Y axis, you plug the number of
nodes that actually have that node degree. For instance, if the point is X
axis equals 1 and Y axis equals 1M, it means 1M vertices in this graph. Each have a degree of one. Okay, so
you plug this distribution function. Once again,
the Y axis is also log as you notice here. It goes from 1, 100, 10000, 1M. And the power law graph, if you plug the
degrees in for power law graph, it's going to be a straight downward-sloping line
as shown by this green line over here. Okay, so a very large numbers. We have very small degrees in the top
left portion of the curve but some also have very high degree and these are the high degree work
presents in any power law graphs. The exponential graphs
is not a straight line. It's curve at its head,
the top left portion of the plot. And it's also curved at its tail,
the bottom right portion of the plot. And also some distributions which
are heavy tailed distributions which are straight downward sloping at
their tail, the bottom right portion, but they are not necessarily heavy
headed which is top left portion. Okay, so they're almost like power law
graphs in the sense that they have some vertices that have a very high degree, but they don't have that many vertices with
a low enough degree as a power law graphs. So this log node plot is the best way for
you to distinguish when a particular graph, or when a particular network is
either power law, or heavy tailed, or exponential, or something else. You draw the log node plot. If we'd just trade down your sloping line,
it's the power law graph. If it has a heavy tail, if it has
straight tail, that's heavy tailed. And otherwise,
it is some other distribution. So a lot of small world networks
are also power law graphs. For instance, the internet backbone graph,
the telephone call graph, protein networks, the worldwide world
graph is, in fact, a small-world graph. And also, power law graph has a value of
alpha equals somewhere between 2.1 and 2.4, remember that. You have in our power
law graph a degree of with probable deeper version
of they key minus alpha. The Gnutella p2p system has
a heavy-tailed degree distribution. It's not necessarily power law but
it is heavy tail, so it has a straight downward sloping
tail in the log log point. Power law networks are often called
a scale-free networks, for instance, in Gnutella, you have about 3.4
edges per vertex independent of the number of vertices that are present
in your network or in your graph. But then, not all small world networks
are power-law graphs and vice versa. For instance,
co-authorship networks are small world but they're not necessarily power-law. And also,
not all power-law graphs are small-world. You can generate power-law networks
using the data distribution, where you have disconnected components of
the graph, where they're not necessarily reachable from each other and so
the graph is not a small-world network. But many small world networks are in fact
power-law graphs as far as you find them in reality, and
because a lot of these graphs, a small world and power-law,
their resilience comes into question. Most nodes have a small
degree in these graphs, but a few nodes have a very high
degree in these graphs. So if you launch an attack on one of these
graphs, if the attack is random, for instance, you kill a very large
number of randomly chosen nodes, this will not disconnect the graph, okay? This is why attacking a power-law small
world graph randomly is not really effective at all. But if you target some of these very
high degree nodes in the power-law small world graph, this has a much higher
chance of disconnecting the graph, okay? And this is essentially why,
in the human body for instance, because the graph of proteins
in the human body or chemicals in the human body is a small world
network and also a power-law network, a few of the nutrients are very
high degree nodes in the graph. So, essentially edges
in this protein graph, edges are joined to chemicals
that react with each other. And so some nutrients happen to
have a much higher degree than other nutrients because they react with
a lot of other chemicals in the body. And these nutrients are essentially,
the vitamins in the human body, the minerals that the human body
acquires like calcium and potassium. So, if you have a shortage of any of
these vitamins or nutrients in your body, or minerals, your likely to be in trouble. But if you have a shortage of some
of these other random chemicals that are there in your human body, then it's not likely that you're
going to be affected all that much. Similarly, networks like the internet
as well as the electric power grid, if you target a few high degree vertices,
that's much more likely to disconnect the graph and cause a partition,
and cause outages in the network. But if you target
randomly chosen vertices, that's not likely to have any
effect on the network itself. What about routing in these
networks such as the Internet? If you build shortest-path routes
between every pair of vertices, it turns out that in small-world
power-law networks, most of these shortest-path routes will pass through
some high-degree vertices in the graphs. So these high degree vertices get highly
overloaded with these shortest paths and they're likely to suffer congestions and
perhaps, in fact, even crash. As we have seen from the previous slide,
if you disconnect some of these high-degree vertices, it's also
likely that the entire graph would be disconnected and
you might have an outage in the network. So this should tell you why there
are these frequent outages in networks such as the internet, in
networks such as the electric power grid. It's because these high-degree
vertices suffer congestion and they might crash as a result of that,
and because when they do, they disconnect large portions of
the graph and end up having an outage. So in the internet, one of the solutions to this is to add
some randomness in the path selection. You don't always prefer the shortest path,
but you take some hops in your
path that are random hops and this avoids going through the high
degree vertices with some probability. And so the load in the high
degree vertices reduces, they're less congested and
they have a lower chance of crashing. To wrap up our discussion of structure of
networks, the networks are all around us, both man-made networks, such as the
internet, the World Wide Web and peer2peer networks, as well as natural networks
that have evolved over centuries and millennias such as protein networks and
the human social network. Yet a lot of these networks
have common characteristics. Many of them are small world networks that
have a very high clustering coefficient and very short path lengths. And there's also power-law where you have
a very large number of vertices that have a small degree, but
some vertices have very high degrees. And it's useful to know these
characteristics because when you design distributed systems and distributed protocols that run over
networks like the internet, that run over, that be with social networks
such as online social networks. It's useful to know
these characteristics so that you know exactly how your protocol
is going to behave when it sends packets, when it sends messages over these
networks, or when you run a graph processing algorithm that is
dealing with such power-law graphs. So you can better predict how your
distributed system is going to behave when it runs over small-world networks,
such as the internet. [MUSIC]