[MUSIC] Hi there,
in this lecture we're going to see, the topic of Distributed Graph Processing. Which has come into prevalence in
just the last few years in industry. So we'll see what distributed
graph processing is. And we'll see a little bit of the overview
of Google's Pregel system for distributed graph processing. Pregel is not an open source system,
but Google has published a paper on it. And based on that paper several
systems have been built, including Pregel-like systems. As well as much more advanced
systems that are faster than Pregel. We won't get to discuss all
of these systems in detail. But hopefully, this lecture will give
you enough of an intro into the topic that you can go and look up these systems. If you are so interested. So what is a graph, first? A graph is not a plot. We are not talking of a graph as
in a curve or a a series of dots. A graph instead is a network. And a graph like a network has vertices or
nodes. For instance Facebook, the social
network can be represented as a graph. Where each user is a vertex or a node. A graph also has edges. An edge connects a pair of vertices. For instance, in the Facebook graph
an edge would be a friend relationship between say, you and one of your friends. That would be one edge. The friend relationship between you and a second friend would be a different,
separate edge. And so, a graph consists of vertices and it consists of edges that
join pairs of,uh, vertices. So there are lots of graphs around us. On the right, I have an example of
a picture of a graph taken from Wikimedia. Here you'd see the vertices or nodes shown
in red, and the edges shown in black. Joining a pairs of nodes. So there are graphs all around us. The Internet itself is a graph where
the vertices are routers or switches. And the edges are actual links
joining these routers or switches, links that actually
carry packets and traffic. The World Wide Web can be,
can be represented as graph. Where the vertices are webpages and
the edges are URL links. Where one page points to another. So if you have a URL on one
page pointing to another, that's an edge in
the World Wide Web graph. Now, the World Wide Web graph is a special
kind of graph known as a directed graph because edges are directed. A page A might point to a page B, that does not mean page
B also points back to A. So edges actually have directions,
they are unidirectional and so the World Wide Web graph is
an example of a directed graph. Graphs were edges are bidirectional by
default are known as undirected graphs. Social graphs such as Facebook,
again an example of undirected graphs. Twitter is an example of a directed
graph because you can follow someone and that doesn't mean they'll follow you back. LinkedIn is a dir, is an undirected graph as well
because the, edges are bi-directional. Other graphs include the DNA interaction
graphs, the Ecosystem graphs, chemical reaction graphics and
a whole lot other graphs. So in, in fact in any area of science you
can find graphs, you can draw graphs. And then,
you want to make sense of these graphs. So graph processing operations try to
derive properties from these graphs. They try to summarize
graphs into statistics, so that you can understand what
the graphs are telling you much better. For instance, you may want to find
shortest paths between pairs of vertices. In the internet, graphs are useful for
shortest path routing. So that your packets can
get routed fairly quickly. In LinkedIn shortest paths is useful to
find the degrees of separation between you and someone else. So if you've used LinkedIn you might
notice that it says this is a first connection, or a second connection,
or a third connection. That's a degrees of separation and that's obtained by running
the shortest path algorithm. To see what is the distance
between you and another user. What is the shortest distance
between you and another user. In dating websites such as Match.com. Graph processing operations are used to
find good matches between pairs of users. And there are many, many other examples of
graph processing applications being used. So what's so challenging about this? Well one of the biggest challenges is
that these graphs are very, very large. The human social network has hundreds
of millions of, of vertices, and billions of edges. If you consider the the graph consisting
of all the humans in the world, where every represents
a human in the world. And edges represent a friends or
relative relationships. Then that graph has 6 to
7 billion vertices and many hundreds of billions of edges. The world wide web itself has
millions of vertices and edges. So these are very very large graphs. They're so large that the entire graph
cannot be stored on a single server for processing. Even if were to be stored on
a single server it would be really, really slow on that server. Even if the server had many,
many processors. So this is where the distributor, the
cluster, or the cloud comes into action. Where you can use a large number of
machines in a cloud infrastructure or in a data center. To process, a very large graph,
very very quickly, and very efficiently. So what is a typical graph
processing application look like? Here we are not talking of a typical
graph processing application, we'll not keep talking of
the distributed version of it. I'll talk about
the distributed version soon. So, graph processing application
works in iterations. So one iteration, a, leads to the next. Each vertex is assigned a value. At the beginning of the iteration, the
value is some default value, like zero. Then in each iteration, each vertex in the graph gathers
the values from its immediate neighbors. A, vertices who are,
who are adjacent to it by a edge. So, for instance, at the vertex A here,
shown in the figure. Its immediate neighboring
vertices will be B, C, D, and E. Those are the vertices that
join it directly with an edge. So A would obtain their values at
the beginning of the iteration. So B would send its value to A. C would send its value to A. And D would send its value to A. And E would also send its value to A. Once it has all these values, A would then use its immediate neighbor
values along with its own value. To compute its own new value. And then at the end of the iteration, it would send out it's new value
to it's immediate neighbors. So it would send out it's value to B,
C, D, and E. Then B, C, D, and
E in this iteration they had also used the value of a to compute
their own new values. And the next iteration again they'll use
a new value of a to compute their own new values. So this series of steps,
one, two, three, is done for every vertex in the graph
during each iteration. So you keep doing this itteratively and,
how many iterations do you have? Well, you can either have a fixed number
of iterations after which the graph processing terminates. Or a the kind of application your
running actually converges for example the shortest path. Algorithm is one of the algorithms
that actually converges. Then after a while vertices
will stop changing values. So they'll get values but the new value that you computed in the
second step will be same as the old value. And if all the vertices in a given
iteration do change values, then the computation has terminated. So in order to run this is a distributed
system, can we use Hadoop? That is the first thought that we have. Well if you load this using
Hadoop essentially we would have a multistage Hadoop. Where you would have one MapReduce
phase for each iteration. So each MapReduce stage
would be one iteration. So if you had 100 iterations you
would have 100 chained Hadoop or MapReduce jobs after the other. You'll use the vertex IDs as
the keys in the reduce phase. So that the information about a particular
vertex would get routed to the same reduce task. Which would then use it to compute
the new value for that vertex. This is attractive because of
course Hadoop is well known. So it may be fairly straightforward to
write this application up in Hadoop. But it's fairly inefficient. And the end of every stage,
that is at the end of every iteration. You essentially are transferring all
the vertices values over the network to the reduce task or
almost all the vertices. And this can be very, very slow. Because essentially you're transferring
the entire graph during each iteration over the network; that's really,
really slow. Also, if you're using Hadoob,
at the end of the reduce phase. The vertex values may be written to
the HDFS, the distributed files system, and that makes it even slower. So, Hadoop may be easier to code up. But it's very very slow as far as
the graph processing's concerned. And our, and our main reason for using a distributor infrastructure data
center was to speed up graph processing. So what comes to our rescue is what is known as
the Bulk Synchronous Parallel Model. Where essentially you have
local competition being done at multiple processors parallelly. Here you think like a vertex. So each vertex is computed
separately by a different processor. But at the end of iteration,
all the processors meet a barrier. But all of them wait for all of the other
processors to complete their iteration, and only then do they proceed
into the next iteration. The BSP or Bulk Synchronous Parallel Model
was originally proposed by Valiant. And that is what is used by many of
the distributor graphing agents today. So in the basic distributed
graph processing engines today, you think like a vertex. You assign each vertex to one server, so each server gets a subset of
the vertices in the graph. Then in each iteration each server
performs Gather-Apply-Scatter for each of its assigned vertices. For each of its vertices it gathers
all its neighboring vertices' values. So for
a given vertex that a server is assigned, it gets the values from the vertices. That are immediately joined
to that vertex by an edge. Some of these vertices may
be local at the server. Other vertices may be
located on other servers, so you fetch their vertex
values over the network. Then once you have these values you apply. In other words you compute this vertice's,
vertex's new value using its old value and the values of its immediate
neighboring vertices. And then you scatter. You send the new value over to
these neighboring vertices. 'Kay, so this is really very similar to
the three steps we had discussed earlier in the non-distributed
version of graph processing. So here it makes a difference. What makes a difference here
is which server you assign a given vertex to because this can
reduce the amount of communication. If the neighboring vertices of a given
vertex are in the same server as itself. Then essentially, you can fetch their values without
involving any network overhead. So there's a couple of options in
assigning servers to vertices, the first is Hash-based. Where you take the vertex id you hash
it using a well known hash function and you then take modulo number of servers. And whatever value you get is a server
number to which that vertex is assign to. Okay again this is random but it's consistent and
this should be familiar to you. Because this is essentially consistent
hashing as we discussed in P2P systems. And we discuss to be
hash tables like card. Our second option is locality-based, where
you assign vertices with more neighbors, to the same server as its neighbors. So a vortex, that has a very high number
of neighbors is located on the same server, is assigned to the same
server as its neighbors. And so, fetching the,
those neighbor values, is, are just local operations and
do not involve any network overhead. This reduces server to server
communication volume at each iteration. Now the Pregel system by Google follows
the Bulk Synchronous Parallel approach. And here is in a nutshell how it works. Pregel uses the master worker model. There is one master server. And there are multiple worker servers. These would also be master
daemon the master daemons and the worker daemons running on
each of the other servers. The master servers are responsible for maintaining the list of worker
servers monitoring them. If any of them fail,
then you need to restart them and reassign any failed
vertices to newer servers. And the master also maintains
a graphical user interface and a web UI for monitoring
the progress of the other workers. The workers in turn are responsible for
actually carrying out the gather apply scatter on the vertices
that are assigned to them. And also for communicating with the other
workers in fetching the values of the neighboring vertices where necessary. Typically in Pregel, the persistent data is stored as files
on a distributed storage systems. Such as GFS in Pregel's Google or
in the BigTable system. And temporary data is also
stored on local disk. And it's stored on local disk
because essentially after, if the worker crashes and then recovers. You want to be able to
start where you left off. So how does a Pregel Execution proceed? Well first of all many copies of the
program begin executing on the cluster. The worker daemon starts up, and
the master daemon starts up. The master then assigns a portion of the
input, that is a subset of the vertices, to each worker. Each worker loads the vertices
from say the GFS or BigTable and marks these vertices as active. And then in each attrition the master
instructs the all the workers to perform the iterations. So the worker loops through it's active
vertices and computes a new value for each vertex. Based on it's old value and
the neighbor values. The messages that contain the new vertex
values can be sent any time during the iteration. But they need to be delivered
before the iteration is done. That is before the buyer is
reached by all the bonuses, by all the,
servers at the end of the equation. When all the workers reach the,
barrier divide iteration, then the master is informed about this. And ignores that all the workers
finished this particular iteration. And then the master can move on
to the next iteration and, see, repeat these three steps again for
all the workers. When does a computation halt? Well, the computation halts
when in some iteration, it's true that none of
vertices are active. And all the vertices and markers are inactive meaning the values
have not changed since the last iteration. And when no messages are in transit
during the particular iteration. This means that the competition
has terminated it has converged. There are going to be no more
vertex value changes in the future. At this point of time, the master can
instruct each worker to save its portion of the graph or its results. And you now have whatever values
your application set out to compute. Whether they are shortest path values,
whether they're values about, you know, matching, integrating graph. Or other values as far as your
application is concerned. What about failures? How does Pregel handle failures? Well Pregel uses checkpointing. Periodically the master instructs
the workers to save the state of their partitions to persistent storage. The state includes, the vertex values, edge values and
any, messages that are in transit. And these checkpoints can then be used,
to recover in the future. Ping based messages are used from
the master to the worker for the master to keep track
of the worker failures. If a worker fails, and
then the master re-assigns, graph partitions to
the currently available workers. So that every vertex is still
assigned to one server. And then the worker all reload their
partition state from the recent, from the most recent checkpoint. And then they start where they left off. So when you have a failure, essentially
you might end up losing the value of the, work since the last checkpoint. If you're checkpointing at
the end of every iteration. Then you'd lose at most one
iterations worth of work. And you can start from
the latest iteration. So how fast is Pregel? For the single shortest path or
SSSP benchmark. On the 1 billion vertex graph,
which is a tree graph. With 50 workers computing
SSSP to 180 seconds,. With 800 workers, it took about
20 seconds, which is pretty fast. When you see the size of the, a,
graph, with 50 billion vertices, which is a pretty large graph. You know, the, the social, the human
social network graph in the world would contain, a, about, not,
no more than 70 billion vertices. So, 50 billion vertices, and 800 workers,
this takes about 700 seconds, which is about 12 minutes which is,
you know, pretty fast. So that wraps up our discussion
of distributed graph processing. Graphs are all around us and
large graphs are all around us. Whether they are internet graphs, World
Wide Web graphs, or social network graphs. And we need to process these
to make sense of them. Map Reduce is an attractive approach but
it's not very fast. It's not, it's not very efficient. Instead we want to use distributed
graph processing systems such as Pregel by Google. Or their offshoots including open
source systems like Piccolo and Giraph, which are very much
Pregel-like in their implementation. Or other systems that
are much faster than Pregel, including GraphLab, PowerGraph,
LFGraph, and X-Stream. These are systems that have come out of,
research, projects in the last few years. And, some of these are open source. And they are being used increasingly,
in order to process graphs in, clusters. [MUSIC]