[MUSIC] So in this next series of lectures we're
going to see the important topic of scheduling. In particular, today we're going to
see single-processor scheduling. But let's start from a, a higher level. So why do you need scheduling at all? Well, many cloud computing system,
you have multiple tasks to schedule. For instance, if we just consider your
laptop or workstation or even your mobile device, there are multiple processes
that are running on that device. On your laptop, you know,
you have your browser running, your your editor running you,
you maybe you have an IDE running. And essentially the operating
system needs to schedule these processes across
the limited resources that it has. Primarily the main resource is
the processor or the CPU and if you have a single core OS or a single core machine, then you have a
particular series of scheduling problems. And of course you might have a multicore
machine where you might be able to schedule multiple
processes simultaneously. But once again,
typically the number of processes is much more than the number
of processors that you have, the number of CPU that you have, and so
scheduling here becomes a challenge. In a cloud computing cluster,
you might have a Hadoop job running. And that Hadoop job has multiple tasks, so the cluster needs to decide where to
schedule each task of the Hadoop job. You might have multiple Hadoop jobs,
each with their own tasks. And that they might be competing for
resources and now the cloud scheduler needs to decide where to schedule these different
tasks of these different Hadoop jobs. You have a large number of tasks and there
are limited resources that these tasks absolutely need so each task typically
needs some amount of processing capacity, a processor some amount of memory, and of
course it needs disk and network as well. But typically scheduling algorithms
vary about processor and memory because these are the resources for
where which there is most connection. There are two goals of
scheduling algorithms. The first is to increase the throughput on the number
of jobs you can execute per time unit. And related to that is
releasing the response time or releasing the time that it takes
one job to complete in your system. Essentially we'll just take into
account the completion time of jobs. The second is high
utilization of resources. You want your resource to be
utilized as much as possible. You want your, all of your processors
to be utilized 100% of the time, all of your memory to be
utilized 100% of the time, so that you're making the most out of the
resources that you invested your money in. So, let's look at single-processor
scheduling in the lecture. So, you have just one processor
in this particular problem and you might have multiple tasks that
are trying to compete for these resources. In this example, I have three tasks. Task 1, Task 2, Task 3. Task 1 arrives at times 0. It has a running time of 10 time units. Task 2 arrives at time 6. It has a running of 5 time units. And Task 3 arrives at time 8. It has a running time of 3 time units. So you need to decide
when to schedule these, each of these tasks at what
time on the single processor. So one of the basic scheduling algorithm's
is what is known as fi, FIFO, or first in first out. This is also known as FCFS or
first come first serve. So in this algorithm you
maintain the tasks in a queue, in the order in which the tasks arrive. So tasks that arrived earlier
are ahead in the queue. Tasks that arrived later
are later on in the queue. Whenever a processor is free, you de-queue
the task at the head of the queue and you schedule it on the processor. So for instance, at 0 when Task 1 arrives,
place it in the queue. It's the only task right now and so
it executes until time inter, time time 6. At the point Task 2 arrives,
it's placed in the queue, but then Task 1 is still executing on the processor so
Task 1 is allowed to complete. At time 8 the Task 3 arrives and
it's added to the queue but after Task 2. At time 10 when Task 1 finishes,
the head of the queue is Task 2, so that's dequeued and
it's scheduled on the processor. It runs until completion, which happens
at time 15, at which time, once again, the header of the queue, which is Task 3 now, is dequeued
as is scheduled on the processor. Task 3 finishes at time 18. So Task 1 finished at time 10. Task 2, which arrived second,
finished at time 15. Task 3, which arrive,
which arrived last, finished at time 15. This is the FIFO algorithm and
even though, we are discussing it for a single processor now you're here, FIFO
is in fact used by a variety of different cloud computing schedulers,
including the Hadoop scheduler. So how about the performance of FIFO or
FCFS? Well the average completion time,
which is really what we care about, we want the completion time to be as small
as possible may be kind of high for FIFO. For instance, for example, the average
completion time can be calculated by adding the completion times for the three
tasks and then divided, dividing them by 3, so that's 10 plus 15 plus 18 divided
by 3, or 43 by 3, or 14.33 time units. This is not, this is on the higher side,
I'm telling you. But, you know,
can we do better than 14.33? What is another scheduling algorithm that
is better, that does better than 14.33? Well that better scheduling algorithm
is known as shortest task first. So in this particular approach, again
you maintain all the tasks in a queue, but not in the order of arrival. Instead you maintain the the tasks
in increasing order of running time. So tasks that are shorter are maintained
towards the head of the queue and tasks that are longer are maintained
at the tail of the queue. Whenever the processor is free,
you de-queue the head task and you schedule it on the processor. So once again let's go to an example
of your three tasks, Tasks 1, 2, and 3, with task lengths of 10, 5, and 3. The arrival times here are all zeros
because I want to show you an example where the STF scheduling algorithm in
fact has to make decisions among tasks. And so here on Task 3 which has the
shortest length is chosen to run first. It starts running at time 0 and
ends at time 3. At which point Task 2 which is
the next shortest task is scheduled. It runs from time 3,
finishes at time 8, and finally Task 1, the longest task is run
from time 8 to time 18. So this is the shortest task
first scheduling algorithm, STF, sometimes this is, this algorithm,
is also known as SJF, or shortest job first scheduling algorithm,
but we'll stick with STF because I want to maintain
the uniformity of terminology here. So why does STF do better than FIFO? Well STF in fact that can be proved,
formally proved, to create the shortest or the smallest average completion time among
all possible scheduling approaches for a single processor system. So given a single processor system and a
bunch of tasks that you need to schedule, among all the possible scheduling
strategies that you might have, the STF strategy gives you
the smallest average completion time. For instance, for our previous example,
the, the average completion time of STF is the sum of the three completion times
for the three tasks, divided by 3, which happens to be, 18 plus 8 plus 3, divided
by 3, which is 29 by 3, which is 9.66. And this is much smaller than the
completion time of 14.33 which we had for the FIFO/FCFS approach. The other nice thing
about STF is that it is actually a special case of what
is known as priority scheduling. In this particular STF scheduling
approach, we sorted the tasks according to the running time, and in fact
we treated the running time as a priority. But instead the priority might
be specified by the user, for instance the user might specify a higher
priority for interactive tasks that involve keyboard and mouse input, but a
lower priority for background batch tasks that don't require any user input but
have an output at the end of the long run. You always place the higher priority
tasks at the head of the queue and whenever those tasks, I wanted to compute
you let them run on the processor. A third scheduling algorithm is what is
known as round-robin scheduling algorithm. In this case scheduling algorithm
you allow tasks to be run in pieces or in chunks. In other words you split up a task into
small quanta, and the quanta may be used as small time units as just say one
time unit as in our example here. And you run only a portion of
the task at the head of the queue. When that portion of the task
is done you preempt that task. In other words you save the task of that,
and the state of that task and then you add it add the task back
again to the, to the end of the queue. You take the head of the queue task again,
whatever task happens to be at the head of the queue, and then you start
running that task at the processor. In order to run this again we
need to bring back in the saved state of that task if it
was preempted in the past. So again in our example, we go back to
our example of three tasks, 1, 2 and 3 which arrive at times 0,
6, and 8 respectively. So Task 1 arrives first,
it's the only one so it's run so that it occupies the entire
processor until time 6. At which point of time Task 2 arrives, and
so Task 2 is now run for one time unit. And then when it's run for one time unit,
it is put back at the end of the queue and Task 1 is allowed to run,
at this point of time, Task 1 has run for 6 plus one 7 time units. Task 2 has run for only one time unit. Then at time 8, Task 3 arrives and
now it is allowed to run for one time unit because it's at the head
of the queue, now after it runs for one time unit it's put at the tail
of the queue and now Task 1 and Task 2 are allowed to run,
and then again Task 3. So this pattern repeats again. Then again you have other
three tasks to run. And at this point of time,
Task 1 is run for nine time units. You have 6 plus 3 greens, that's 9 greens. Task 2 is run for 3 time units. And Task 3, it has the blue ones,
has run, has run for 3 time units. And units 1, 2, and 3. And so
Task 3 is actually done at time 15, 'kay? So after this you have a Task 1 and
Task 2 to cycle through, so you round-robin through them, and
then this continues for a while. At this point of time actually Task
1 is done at time extent of 17. Round-robin essentially gives
a fair share of the resource, the processor, to all the tasks
that are present in the system. So when do you prefer round-robin and when
do you prefer shortest task first or FIFO? Well, round-robin is more preferable for
interactive applications, applications that need, periodically
need to, a, access to the processor so that they can run and
process things like the keyboard input and the mouse input the and
so on and so forth, 'kay? These are applications where the user
needs quick responses from the system. On the other hand, FIFO or shortest
tasks first is more preferable for batch applications where the user submits
a job, goes away for a while, and comes back later on to get the result. For these you don't necessarily
need to have applications that that run in quanta, but it can give
them access to the CPU all at once. And in fact, there are many hybrid
scheduling approaches that combine both the round-robin that we have seen and
the FIFO/STF that we have seen, these are known as
hierarchical approaches. So to wrap up our discussion of single
processor schedule algorithms we've discussed only classical algorithms
including FIFO/FCFS which schedules in the order of arrival. Shortest task first which
schedules the smaller tasks first. And priority, which is a generalized case
of the shortest task first scheduling where each task is scheduled in the order
of the user specified priority. Also round-robin scheduling
algorithm's which are well-matched for interactive applications where each
task is given small shares to run. And of course this is only, this is only a
sliver of the many scheduling algorithm's that are out there,
which I encourage you to look up. We haven't discussed cloud scheduling yet,
and that's what we're going to discuss
in the next lecture in this series. [MUSIC]