In this lecture we're going to
be discussing stream processing. Now, stream processing is a very old
branch of distributed computing. But in the last few years, it has come into the prominence because
of the new workloads that we are seeing. And one of the systems that has become
very popular is the Storm system, and we'll be discussing some of the,
the details of Storm in this lecture. So we'll discuss why stream processing
is important in today's workloads and then also we'll discuss some
design details of Storm. So today's workloads involve large amounts
of data whether these are feeds in a social network or
whether they're information click for information from particular websites or
from advertisement networks or whether there are logs of accesses in any
distributing computing infrastructure. So when you have such large
amounts of information, you need some real-time view of these of these
data, so that they can be compressed. And they can be distilled down into
a form that is digestible to human users. So, for instance, in social networks
you have the capability of search, and this is often real-time search as you
might find in the Twitter social network, where you can do a real-time search of the
tweets that are being put out right now on a particular topic or
with a particular key word. When you have websites which
are collecting data about who is visiting websites you may
want to do a website's statistics for instance, analytics like Google Analytics. Also you might want to detect what
intruders into your distributor cluster for instance most data centers are running
some form of intrusion detection system or the other, and all these require real-time
analysis of the data that's coming in. Essentially real-time analysis means
that you have large amounts of data and you need to process very large amounts of
data within a few seconds with very low latencies and with very high throughput,
as much data per second as possible. And you want to produce
some amount of knowledge or information out of that
data that you're getting. So you want to convert data into knowledge
but fairly quickly even if the dat, even if the data cannot
be processed completely you want to still be able to [SOUND] glean
some information out of it, at least. So that's a stream processing challenge
and of course you might think well, the MapReduce system is available and
we've already used it for batch computing before,
why not just use it? And in fact there are variants
of MapReduce that are aimed at stream processing. But essentially MapReduce is
a batch processing framework. And you need to wait for an entire
computation on a large dataset to complete before you can get the results. There is no notion of partial
results in MapReduce at all. Even the variants of MapReduce that
are tuned to stream-processing or to incremental processing, there are
incremental versions of MapReduce as well, still have a fairly high latency. And essentially MapReduce is not intended
for stream-processing applications. And essentially it's not ra, intended to be a long running application
which is what stream processing really is. So the Storm system has become very
popular in the last few years. It's an Apache project
in the Apache incubator. It's one of the more highly
active JVM projects today. Multiple languages are supported in
the API including Python and Ruby. And Storm as of today is used by
many companies including Twitter for personalization and for search. So every time you do a Twitter search,
they're likely using indirectly the Storm system that Twitter
is running in the data centers. Flipboard uses Storm for
generating custom feeds. And a variety of other companies and
websites use Storm as well, including the Weather Channel WebMD.com,
and others. So Storm consists of five, of, consists
of many components, and the five major keywords in Storm are tuples, streams,
spouts, bolts, and topologies. We'll study these what these
are over the next few slides. So tuple is essentially
an ordered list of elements. For instance, a tuple might be, in the Twitter world,
a tweeter followed by the tweet itself. For instance a tuple might be
the the tweeter name which is Miley Cyrus followed be the tweet which says, Hey! Here's my new song! A different tuple might be a,
a different tweeter, Justin Bieber followed by
the tweet itself, Hey! Here's MY new song! In a different world where you're
collecting click through logs the tuple might be the URL followed by the IP of the
clicker client then the date and the time. For instance the URL
might be coursera.org, the IP is 101.201.301.401,
then you have the date and the time. A different tuple might be from
a different client, 901.801.701.601. And then a slightly later time. Okay, so each of these is a tuple. And you want to process these tuples. You don't have just one
tuple as you've see here. You have multiple tuples and so a stream
is said to be a sequence of tuples, potentially unbounded,
which means that the stream might poten, contain potentially
infinite number of tuples. For instance,
in our social network example, we could have all the tweets that
are being put out there, vi, via stream. So for instance, the Miley Cyrus tweet,
followed by the Justin Bieber's tweet, followed by a tweet by
Rolling Stones that says, Here's my old song that's
still a super hit. And so on and so forth, you can have
other tuples coming in as well. Similarly in the website example,
the two tuples we discussed might be part of a stream that contain
other tuples, as well. Essentially, you have a sequence
of tuples coming in, or a stream. And you need to parse, process these
tuples potentially one tuple at a time. But who generates these tuples? The process or entity that generates these
tuples is known as the spout in Storm. The spout is a source of streams. Often the spout reads from a crawler or
from a database. So, for instance it might be reading
from a database in the case of Twitter, the database that contains the actual
tweets that are being posted. Or in the case of a web analytics
application it might be reading from a crawler that is crawling the proxy
logs of a particular webpage. So a spout can generate
multiple streams so here I have a green stream of green tuples
and an orange stream of orange tuples being generated simultaneously
by the same spout. How do you process these streams? Well the entity that process processes
a stream is known as a bolt in Storm. A bolt processes input streams typically, just one input stream but it can process
multiple input streams as well and in turn it generates an output stream
which is then fed to other bolts. In this example, I have a spout on
the left generating a green stream for the first bolt,
which processes one tuple at a time, maybe multiple tuples at a time and
generates some output tuples. In this case, the purple tuples which
are then fed as input to another bolt over here, the second bolt,
which then generates yellow tuples which are then fed potentially to
another bolt and so on and so forth. So a bolt is essentially a program that is
given as input one or more streams, and then decides when it gets a tuple
from these multiple streams or from just one stream,
whichever are its input streams. It decides how to generate output bolts. Okay, so that's typically the code
you would be writing when you write a Storm application. You'd be writing code for
each of the bolts in your application. And your application essentially
consists of a series of bolts connected in a topology. So a directed graph of spouts and bolts along with output
bolts is called a topology. And that's essentially equivalent or
corresponds to a Storm application. So in this case I have three bolts
in my application, one spout, and of these bolts is the output bolt. The rightmost bolt is the output bolt. And as shown here,
essentially you would write code for each of these three bolts in the system
as per your application requirements. And then final bolt, the rightmost bolt
will generate some output bolts for you. Now topologies are essentially
directed graphs and topologies may contain loops as well, they can have cycles as is shown over here
if your application in fact requires it. But of course when you're recording cycles
you have to be careful that you're not creating infinite loops so
that you're, you know, you need to be sure that tuples are not
going around in the system forever. You need to make sure that tuples
are in fact being processed and then within some amount of time
they're they leave the system. They don't stay around forever. So bolts themselves the entity that processes streams
can come in many different flavors. Three of the more popular flavors
are filter, join, and apply. A filter essentially forwards a tuple
only if it satisfies a condition. So that's essentially very similar
to the SQL filtering notion. A join receives has a tuple,
has a bolt receiving multiple streams, say it receives two streams A and B. It computes a cross product of all
the tuples and streams A and B. And for every pair of tuples, one from A, one from B, it then checks whether it
satisfies a condition, and if it does, then it outputs something, okay,
perhaps something from those two tuples. That's again very similar to
the notion of a database join. Finally, you have an apply or transform
which takes a tuple and modifies it according to a function perhaps even
according to a filter function. And there of course many other
functions that bolts can implement. In fact, you can write up your own bolt
your own bolt functionality that either uses these functionalities or
doesn't implements a new functionality. But no matter what bolt you implement,
the bolt needs to process a lot of data. Remember that we are having very
large amounts of data coming in and there are potentially
gigabytes per second, maybe even terabytes per
second coming into each bolt. I need to process this large amount
of data and process it fast. So in order to make bolts,
each bolt fast you can paralize bolts. You can paralize a bolt into
multiple processes or tasks. So a,
a bolt might consist of multiple tasks and incoming stream into that bolt
is split among these tasks. Typically each incoming bolt, incoming
tuple goes to one task in the bolt, but it might also go to multiple tasks. How an incoming tuple is routed among the tasks in a given bolt is decided
by what is known as a grouping strategy. So, there are three types of
grouping that are popular, which decide how the tuples of a stream
are distributed among the tasks of the bolt to which
that stream is going to. So, the first is shuffle grouping,
which distributes the tuples of a stream evenly among the tasks of the bolt, and
this is done in a round-robin fashion. So, essentially as you receive tuples,
you go through the tasks in a sequential order, giving
each task one other batch of tuples and then you loop back around to
the beginning of that list of tasks and then you do that again for
the incoming tuples. However this may not be what you
want because you may need to group the tuples based on some fields,
or a subset of its fields. This is where field
grouping comes into play. So here you group a stream
by a subset of its fields. For instance,
you may want to have all the tweets, all the tuples where the Twitter
username starts with A through M or 0 through 4 to go to task one, and
the remaining tuples to go to task 2. This allows you to, for instance, aggregate those individual
classes of user names. And this is done via fields grouping. Finally you have all grouping as well, where all the tasks of the bolt
receive all the input tuples. This is especially useful for joins. For instance if you're trying to join the
incoming stream with some other stream or with an existing database then this
is fairly useful for an all grouping. How is a Storm cluster server run? Let's discuss a little bit about
the infrastructure components. So the Storm cluster is run by a master
node, again elected using leader election. The master node runs
a daemon called a Nimbus. And Nimbus is responsible for
three functionalities among others. It is responsible for
distributing code along the clusters. So when a bolt is started up on another
server Nimbus is responsible for sending the code for
that bolt to that particular server. It's responsible for
assigning tasks to machines. So when a bolt is split up into multiple
tasks, which task runs and which servers, that's decided by Nimbus. Also Nimbus is responsible for
failure detection. If any of these servers or any bolts
crashes, Nimbus needs to detect this and then potentially restart the tasks or
the bolts on other servers. The servers themselves
are running the worker node. This is run by,
via a daemon known as a supervisor. This listens for
work assigned to its machine. So it's,
it talks to the Nimbus server, and it also keeps track of the tasks that are
running at itself, so that if any of these tasks crashes it can then be either
restarted or the Nimbus daemon can be asked by the supervisor for a new task
that needs to be run in its place. A Storm also uses the Zookeeper system
which you have seen elsewhere in this course which helps coordinate
between the Nimbus and the supervisors. And keep all the state of
the supervisors the supervisors and the Nimbus in a consistent place so
that if any of these crashes you can then recover using what's
kept in the Zookeeper system itself. What do you do with failures? So of course you have failures, a server
might crash while it is in the midst of processing a tuple and if it does so
then those tuples might be lost, any of the tuples that are in transit
at the server might be lost, 'kay? So in order to tack, tackle this Storm
uses what is known as anchoring, where you can anchor an output to one or
more of its input tuples. 'Kay, and
the failure of this output tuple, tuple you received causes one or more of
those tuples to be replayed in the system. The way you do this is via an API which is
specified in the OutputCollector class. This has three major functions,
emit, ack, and fail. Emit essentially emits an output tuple
perhaps anchored to an input tuple. And if you want to anchor to an input
tuple you specify that as the first argument in emit. You can acknowledge that a tuple has
been done by calling the ack function. And this means that the spout will now
know that hey this tuple has been, this input tuple that I had generated
has been processed by the last bolt in the topology. Or you can fail a tuple this
immediately fails a spout to pull at the root at the tuple topology and
if so then you would re, start replaying the tuples that have been missed
as specified in the fail function itself. 'Kay, this might be done for
instance if there is a failure or there is an exception from
the database and so on and so forth. Typically, you need to be, in Storm, at least in the current version, you need
remember to explicitly acknowledge or fail each tuple there is no implicit
failure detection of the tuple themselves. And if you don't do so then you can
certainly miss tuples that are not being, that will not be processed
because of failures, but also because tuples consume memory. You might have memory leaks because
the tuples might stay on forever inside a particular server and
never be garbage collected. So, in order to prevent this,
you need to make sure that you use ack or fail in a consistent manner
in an exclusive manner, across all the tuples
that you are processing. So to wrap up our discussion of stream
processing in Storm processing data, large amounts of data and
real time systems i, in trace systems in real time within
a few seconds is a big requirement. And although stream processing
systems have been around for a long period of time, for instance IBM
has had a very long running project called Streams which is a very popular and
widely used proprietary system. One of the newer open source
systems that has emerged for processing streams today is Storm or
Apache Storm. Then many sister systems that have
emerged as an offshoot of Storm. For instance, Spark Streaming
from Berkeley but in essen, in essence Storm allows you to process
large amounts of data, large amount, large streams in very short periods
of time with very high tuple. To do this it uses parallelism and
it, it allows you to write up arbitrary applications using
application topologies and it also supports some
notion of fault tolerance.