[MUSIC] Hi there, in this lecture we're going to
see two types of scheduling approaches that are very popularly used
with Hadoop clusters today. So Hadoop job, if you recall,
consists of Map tasks and Reduce tasks. When you have one job in the cluster, and that's the only job in the cluster,
its tasks can occupy the entire cluster. So different resources in
the cluster can be allocated to that particular job's tasks. However, you might have multiple
customers with multiple jobs, and these users, customers, are jobs that
are known as tenants in the cluster. So you have essentially a multi-tenant
system, where they are multiple tenants occupying in the cluster, and competing
for resources that the cluster has. So you need an approach or a strategy to schedule all of these
jobs from across the different tenants. And when I say schedule jobs, I essentially mean schedule the tasks
that are inside these jobs. And sometimes you want to be fair across
the different tenants in your system. You don't want to give one tenant much
more resources than another tenant. You do not want to allow one tenant to
complete the whole of your cluster, and deny access to the cluster
to the other tenants. So Hadoop YARN has two schedulers that
are very popular with installations today, the Hadoop Capacity Scheduler,
and the Hadoop Fair Scheduler. We'll discuss the Capacity Scheduler
first, and then the Fair Scheduler. The Hadoop Capacity Scheduler
contains multiple queues. If you recall from our discussion of
single process scheduling algorithms, the queues essentially contain jobs. So each queue contains multiple jobs. Each queue is guaranteed some
portion of the cluster capacity. For instance, you might configure
your system with two queues, Queue 1, which has 80% of the cluster, and
Queue 2, which has 20% of the cluster. And in this case, you might have the
higher priority jobs in the system go to Queue 1 because it has a lot more
of the resources in the cluster. For jobs that are within the same queue,
typically first in first out scheduling or first come first serve scheduling at CFS,
FIFO CFS is used. This is again, something that you've seen
in a single processor scheduling approach. But essentially, what happens here is
that a job that arrived earlier would be given resources first. So whatever resources it needs for
its task it's given first. And then, when that job is done,
the next job in the queue is taken, and given resources. If the job is not able to fill that
entire queue's capacity, for instance, if a job in Queue 1 occupies
only 40% of the cluster, another job can be allowed to run
concurrently with it in Queue 1 itself. And so, FIFO is typically used, but
again, it's not necessarily used. You could modify the Hadoop Capacity
Scheduler to use a different approach. Administrators allowed
to configure the queues, these queues that are discussed, so you
can configure each queue to have limits. There might be a soft limit,
which specifies how much percentage of the cluster resources of that particular
queue is guaranteed to occupy. Optionally, you can also specify a hard
limit, which is the maximum percentage of the cluster resources that that
queue is guaranteed to occupy. So this means that the queue
cannot cross the hard limit. If the hard limit is 90% it means that, that queue cannot ever be given more
than 90% of the cluster resources. Elasticity's allowed by this particular
approach because if, for instance, there is only one queue that has jobs, then the queue might expand as much as
possible to occupy the entire cluster. So if you're hard cap for
instance, your hard limit is 100%, then that queue could be expanded
to occupy the entire cluster. And its jobs can get the entire cluster,
as long as resources are free. But if there are other queues in
the system that are below their capacity limits, so for instance, if another
queue had a soft limit of 20%, and it is running at 5%,
it now needs to get more resources. Because, for instance,
it might be having more jobs. That other queue may
need to given resources. Which means that this queue, that is
currently occupying the entire cluster, needs to give up some of its resources. So one way to do this might be
to kill the tasks in that queue, but that's not what is done in
the Hadoop Capacity Scheduler approach. Instead, you do not allow
pre-emption at all. Because you do not want to waste tasks
that are sort of part-way through. You don't want to kill any tasks. Instead, you simply wait for
those tasks to finish. When a task finishes, you take away that
part of the resource from the first queue, and give it to the other queue
that is now requiring resources. So essentially, the elasticity or the scaling in portion here
happens slowly as tasks finish. The resources are then taken away from
that queue, which those tasks belong to, and it is given to the other queue
that is requiring resources. So this approach here that you're
seeing is slightly different to the Hadoop Fair Scheduler approach,
which we'll see in a few slides. A few other features in
the Hadoop Capacity Scheduler, the queues themselves can be hierarchical. So a queue might contain child sub-queues,
which may then contain child sub-queues, and so on and so forth. And this is useful so that child sub-queues can be made to share
resources equally in between each other. So for instance, if a queue is given
to one particular organization, the organization might have
multiple departments, and these departments are each
given a child sub-queue. And these child sub-queues now share
resources equally among each other. Scheduling in the Hadoop Capacity
Scheduler can also take memory requirements into account, where the
memory is typically specified by the user. And as of this particular recording,
the Hadoop Capacity Scheduler only supports memory as
a resource being specified. It does not support multiple
resources being specified. So let's look at the other scheduler,
the Hadoop Fair Scheduler. Here the goal is to target a multi-tenant
system where you have multiple jobs or users occupying a cluster. And you want to ensure that all the jobs
get an equal share of the resources in the cluster. But of course when only
one job is present, you want it to get the entire cluster
if that job requires entire clusters. So fairness does not mean you start a job
even though resources are available. However, as other jobs
arrive in the cluster, each job is given an equal
percentage of the cluster resources. For instance, each job might be given
an equal number of cluster wide YARN containers, where a container
is a set of processor, and memory resources that is
enough to run one task of one job. Container is a well accepted term in YARN, which you have seen
elsewhere in the course. So the Hadoop Fair Scheduler
divides a cluster into pools, and typically there is one pool per user. Resources are divided equally among pools. This ensures that each user gets
a fair share of the cluster because each pool gets the same
amount of resources. Within each pool you can use either
fair share scheduling, so all the jobs belonging to one user can either share
resources fairly, and with each other. Or you could use first in first out or
first come first serve scheduling. FIFO, FCFS as you've seen before. This is also configurable, you can
also configure what kind of scheduling algorithm you want to
use within each pool. Some pools are specified,
configured to have minimum shares. This is a minimum percentage of
the cluster resources that that particular pool is guaranteed. When for a particular pool the minimum
share has not been met for awhile, then you take resources away from the
other pools, and you give it to this pool. And here, the Hadoop Fair Scheduler
differs from the Hadoop Capacity Scheduler in how it takes over resources. It takes away the resources
from a pool by, in fact,
killing some of the tasks in that pool. In fact, it pre-empts the jobs
in those pools by killing some of the currently-running tasks of
those jobs in the pool from which it wants to take away resources. These tasks can be re-started later
anyway, and these tasks are idempotent. By idempotent, I mean, that if you run
the task multiple times on the same input, you're going to get the same output. There are no side effects of these tasks. So killing a task partway through, and then just re-starting it later
on the original input is fine. It leads to some wasted work,
but this wasted work can be minimized by picking as a victim to kill,
some task which has started recently. So tasks that have only started recently
are picked first to be killed, and then, if you need to kill more tasks, you kill
tasks that started farther in the past. This again, minimizes the amount of wasted
work because tasks that started recently have probably done just
a little bit of work, and so, killing them will minimize
the amount of wasted work. But it does result in some wasted work. That in some proposals since then from
the research community that have proposed, in fact, saving the task state, and then relearning the tasks
starting from their safe state. However, the Hadoop Fair Scheduler
does not support that. A few other features in
the Hadoop Fair Scheduler. You can also set limits on the number
of concurrent jobs per user. A limit on the number of
concurrent jobs per pool. The limit on the number of
concurrent tasks per pool. All of this, prevents the cluster
from being hogged by just one user or by just one job. It also prevents too many tasks or too
many jobs of one user from competing for a small number of resources that are being
allocated to that particular pool. So far, you have seen
the Hadoop Capacity Scheduler, the Hadoop Fair Scheduler tend to use
the FIFO or the first come first serve, first in first out approach, FIFO or FCFS. But as we have seen in the previous
lecture in the series, FIFO is not necessarily optimal as
far as completion time is concerned. And the question might
be rising in your mind, why not use shortest
trust task force instead? In fact that is optimal, right? As we know it. The challenge with Hadoop is that it's
hard to estimate the expected running time of a task before the task
is actually completed. So it's hard. So when tasks are generated by
a Hadoop job, the tasks do not come specified with the exact time that
the task is going to run for. And as a programmer you
don't know that either. So a way to combat this,
to address this and so that you can use algorithms like shortest-task-first
is to estimate the task length. Okay, so
a few approaches that can be used. So within a job you can calculate
the running time of task or estimate the running time of a task as
being proportion to the size of its input. So if one particular job with a one
megabyte input took 20 seconds, sorry one task with a one megabyte
input took 20 seconds to compute, another task with a two megabyte input,
twice as high as the first task, will take 40 seconds to compute. You can also do
the estimation across jobs, where you can calculate
the running time of a task in a given job as the average of
other tasks in that given job. So you can take the average running time
across all the tasks in that job that have completed, and then based on that you can
calculate the running time of a task. And then also, you can weight this by the
input size of that particular task to get a more accurate running estimate. But of course, these are only estimates,
and so they may not actually be true. And so, you may not actually get
an optimal running time here, even though you're using shortest-task-first
because the estimates may be off. There's been a lot of recent
research results, and research work in this
particular area here. So to wrap up our discussion of Hadoop
Scheduling in YARN we have discussed two schedulers, Hadoop Capacity Scheduler
which tends to be the default scheduler. And the Hadoop Fair Scheduler, which is
used in a variety of different scenarios, and a variety of different
Hadoop clusters. Yet so far in this lecture,
and the previous lecture, we've only dropped one kind of resource. In the previous lecture, it was processor. In this lecture,
it's predominantly memory. But typically,
jobs such as VNs for instance, have a bunch of these source requirements. Some jobs may require,
may have some CPU requirements, and also some memory requirements. And how do you handle this,
we will discuss this in our next lecture.