Hey, everyone, I'm Aishwarya. I'm a faculty member here at UAUC. In this lecture video, I'll be covering
some basics of ML and then talk about distributed machine learning, and
then also talk about some ML frameworks. A lot of people say that ML is nothing but
statistics. While there is some truth to it,
there is also more to ML than statistics. Machine learning essentially trains model,
right? A model is a computer
representation of something. So what are some examples of models? You might have models, for example,
to recognize objects such as cars or cats. Detecting a human face in a picture
is another example of a model. So there are two things when
it comes to creating a model. The first is training and
the second is inference. Training means that you use a bunch of
data to train a model's parameters so that later the model is able
to do some inference for you. So in the above example, you train a model
on hundreds of images of cats and cars. And later given an image, the model can tell you whether that
image is that of a cat or a car. Typically, you do training
on one data set and then you do inference on
a different data set. So there are two types of training,
supervised and unsupervised learning. So, supervised learning means
that the images are labeled. For example, when training a model to
recognize cats or cars and images, you're given also a label for
each of these images, and you can use this information
to better train your model. However, sometimes you don't
have labels for images, and that's when you do something
called unsupervised learning. Anomaly detection is an example where
unsupervised learning is used in the real world. So you have a large data set and you want to discover some data points
that are anomalous in the data set. So that's why you used unsupervised
learning specifically, use something called clustering. Recommendation engines is another example
where unsupervised learning is used. Often in many applications,
that is, ML applications, you use something called STD or
Stochastic Gradient Descent. It's basically an optimization algorithm
that's used to find the model parameters that gives you the maximum accuracy
on a particular training data set. There are many systems that implement STD,
and many distributed machine learning
papers use STD as a common benchmark. Basically, they are doing distributed
versions of Stochastic Gradient Descent. Let's discuss neural networks,
which are very popular. Here, on the right, you have an example
of an artificial neural network, also known as ANN, which is a model. Here, this ANN model
detects a bird in a video. So the input to the neural
network here is an image, and the neural network contains multiple
operators and layers, as shown. So you have multiple operators that
operate parallel, and then you have layers of operators, and operators from one layer
communicates data to the next layer. And finally you get an output saying
either this image contains a bird or no, this image does not contain a bird. So ANNs are widely used in computer
vision and natural language processing. So, again, ANN is nothing but
a layered graph of operators. And in each layer you have multiple
operators that can operate in parallel, just like the stages of a Mac phase, and these operators are computationally
heavy and expensive. So typically you run them
on GPUs instead of CPUs, because GPUs can do certain mathematical
operations very efficiently. Okay, so as I was saying, there is
communication between one stage and the next stage of operators, right? And it's common to have an all to all
communication between these stages. So an operator in one layer,
sends its data, or subset of data to operator in
the next layer, and so on. And these edges between the layers
also contain what we call weights. Basically, these weights
are the model parameters, right? So the data that's passed along
these edges are called tensors. Tensors are nothing but
multidimensional vectors. And so
when a tensor is passed along an edge, the weight on the edge is used to multiply
the value of the dead cell, right? So oftentimes there is also
something called a bias, which you add to this computed value before passing
it as an input to the next stage. So the model that we
are training is not the graph, but the weights and the biases. So the graph is fixed, right? The graph doesn't change during training. What you train are actually the weights
on the edges and operators. And as we change the weights,
the model either would perform better or it would perform worse, right? So the bottom figure on the right here
shows a very simple layer that we call a perceptron layer. So you have inputs X1 to XN, then you have the weights that
you train the model on, right? And then you take a weighted sum of them. So basically you take w0 and
multiply it with x0 plus w1 times x1, so on till wn times xn and
then you apply a step function. And if the weighted sum crosses
a threshold, then you output a one, otherwise you output a zero, all right? For example,
in the above bird detection case, you can calculate a lot of features
in the first few layers of the ANN. And then you may detect, is there a beak,
is there a leg, is there a claw, is there other features, is there a wing? And the last layer,
you use all of these features to see if it crosses a threshold for
you to call this image it's a bird. Maybe sometimes you have some features,
but not all, right? So in that case,
you won't cross the threshold and you wouldn't call it a bird, right? Okay, again, to reiterate
the parameters or the weights, right, weights on the edges and
the weights on the operators are the ones that you train the model right,
you do not change the graph itself. The graph is static. So let's talk more about machine learning,
training and inference. So you have some data that you
pass into training, right, and this data passes forward
through the neural network, and the neural network gives
you a predicted output. During supervised learning,
you also have the labels, right, so you can compare the predicted output and
the label and see if they are the same. If so, it's great, your model is correct,
but if they are not, then you can use it to adjust some
of the weights of the model so that it gives you
the correct output later. So in the training phase, there is
additional backward pass to adjust the model weights so that if the same
input were to be passed in later, the model will give you
the correct output. So the data is passed forward in
the training phase to predict a result, and then the error is calculated
against an actual label. And then maybe you followed up with
a backward pass that adjusts or updates some of the weights so
that in the future, if you were to pass the same input again,
you would get the correct output. So the data that is passed between
the operators are tensors, right, which we already saw, which are multidimensional
vectors that are typically very huge. And during training, you train on one
item at a time, like one image at a time. So you pass in one image,
you then pass back a result and then do some correction and then do
the next image, and so on and so forth. Sometimes that can be inefficient, right? So the training is often patched where
you pass forward not just one image, but a small set of images. And then based on on how
those images are predicted, you might pass back some
corrections on the backward pass. For instance,
if many of them were correct, then you don't need a backward pass. Maybe, let's say, if half of them were
incorrect, you do a backward pass so that you can update the model parameters. So matching can make
the training very efficient. And once you have the model trained,
you do inference, right? So you apply the model to
detect on unlabeled images. There you just need the forward pass,
you don't need the backward pass. So the inference, which is also
sometimes referred to as prediction or model serving, only has a forward pass. There is an emerging area called online
learning, also known as continual learning, where you do training as well
as inference at the same time, right? Okay, now let's talk
about hyperparameters. So whenever we say parameters and machine
learning models, we refer to the weights. That's what we are trying to train, right? But there are also something
called hyperparameters. So hyperparameters include configuration
settings for your entire job. For example, what's your batch size? If your batch size is large,
you might be able to do training fast, but it may not be very accurate. But if it's too small, then training might
be slow, but it might be more accurate. There are other hyperparameters, but overall these hyperparameters are
independent of the weights of the models. The model's weights are the parameters,
and then you have hyperparameters
like the batch size. So there are different types of
neural network models, right? So feed forward neural network or
FFN is a model. That model does not contain any loops. DNN or Deep Neural Networks
are a different type of model. So these are networks
that have hidden layers. So a traditional ANN, an artificial
neural network has only two layers, the input and the output layer. And there are typically
no layers in between. That's a typical ANN, right? But if there are layers in between,
that's a deep neural network. So you have many layers between
the input and the output layer. That's DNN. Convolutional Neural Network or CNN means that there are additional
layers of convolutions. Convolution is a mathematical concept. And convolutional neural networks are used
in Facebook photograph captioning, for example. And then there are also RNNs or
Recurrent Neural Networks, which contains loops
within the same layer. This is often used to
capture time aspects. For instance,
autocorrection on your phone uses RNN. RNNs are also used in Gifs, which have
some temporal components in them. There are also some other
variants that we list here, but I'm not going to talk about it in detail. Let's talk about distributed
machine learning. So you have all of this training data,
which is the collection of input and output labels and then you are also
trying to learn the model weights. And all of these can be very huge. So in a centralized machine learning
approach where you're trying to do all the training and
inference just on a single server, it could be very slow and sometimes
it could be very not possible, right? So it could be infeasible because
the server doesn't have enough memory. So you may want to split your ML
training across multiple machines. And we call this distributed
machine learning, where you use multiple workers
to parallelize the learning. You can also use this to
parallelize inference too, right? So you can speed up inference. So how does this approach
work at a high level? So the figure on the right shows
a distributed machine learning approach which is very popular, which
we call the parameters over approach. Here, in this approach, you run multiple
copies of the model called the model replicas on multiple workers. And then you divide the training
data into a number of subsets and run a copy of the model on
each of these subsets, right? So the model communicates updates through
the centralized parameter server, hence the name. This server keeps the current state
of all the parameters in the model. And usually, you would have more than
one parameter server where the state is sharded across multiple parameter servers,
right? And so each shard is just responsible for
storing and updating a subset of the model parameters. And here's how it works at a high level. So, before processing each mini batch
of inputs, a model replica would ask the parameter server for
the updated copy of model parameters. So after receiving the updated
copy of parameters, the model replica would process the mini
batch of inputs, compute the parameter gradients and then send the gradients
to the parameter server. The parameter server then waits for
all the set of model replicas to send the gradients and then it would
compute the updated model parameters. Now, it would send the model
parameters to the model replicas. Now, in the next iteration, the model replicas would use the updated
parameter values and then do the training. And then compute the gradients and
then send the gradients back, so on and so forth, right? So that's how the parameter
server approach works. So the example that we saw on the previous
slide is an example of data parallelism. But there are also other
types of parallelism. So you have data parallelism,
you have model parallelism and then there is something called pipeline
parallelism, which I won't discuss. So in data parallelism you basically
start the same model on every one of the workers, right? So you shard the input
data across the workers, but all the workers
are running the same model. And they perform training on
a different set of inputs. And then they send the data to a parameter
server which calculates the parameters and sends it back and so on and so forth. But the more important thing is the model
is the same on all the workers, right? That's what data panelism refers to. So either you could be using the
centralized parameter server approach, but there is also a different technique which
we call the all reduce approach where you do not have a parameter server. But instead workers simply multicast their
gradients to all the other workers, right? And every worker receiving the gradients
from all the other n-1 workers and it would just compute the updated model
weights locally just like you would compute that in a centralized
parameter server. Now, there are also two
different variants in training. So you have the synchronous
training method and then you have an asynchronous variant. So, so far we've been discussing
the synchronous variant where in every iteration the worker processes a bunch of
inputs, sends the parameter gradients, maybe you're using the parameter server
approach or the already subtroach. And then you get the updated model weights
and then the next iteration starts, right? So that's a synchronous approach. However, you can also do
an asynchronous training, right? Where a worker,
when it finishes its iteration, it doesn't wait for the other
workers to finish the iteration and it just starts the next iteration, right? That is what we call
asynchronous training. And researchers have shown that
if you do asynchronous training, you might sometimes converge
much faster with your model. And your model might actually be TP
almost as accurate as the synchronous training approach. So that's data parallelism. Now, what's model parallelism? So in model parallelism, so you have a
model, and then you have some data, right? But the memory on the GPU is not
sufficient to run the entire model. So you split the model, break the graph
up, right, across multiple devices. And the models with large
number of parameters or high computational demands typically
benefit from model parallelism, where you have access to multiple GPUs and
memory. But for some graphs, the communication
costs might just dominate. So model parallelism
might not be a good fit. But overall, both model and
data parallelism would speed up training significantly,
so that's distributed ML. Now, let's talk about some machine
learning frameworks that are popular. So one such framework that's popular,
which was built by Google, is TensorFlow, which is used for both large scale
training, as well as inference. And similar to all the other data
processing frameworks that are large scale, which we have looked
into this course, right, TensorFlow hides the details
of distribution. So the developer need not worry
about implementing all the complex logic to distribute the training, the
TensorFlow framework would do it for you. The TensorFlow framework would
efficiently use several GPUs or CPUs for fast training. So TensorFlow can also help
in running trained models for inference in production. And TensorFlow also has some support for
running models on mobile devices. At a high-level, TensorFlow uses
a unified dataflow graph, and this graph represents both
the computation in an algorithm and also the state on which
the algorithm operates. The dataflow graph naturally captures
the structure of computation in machine learning training. In a TensorFlow graph, each vertex represents a unit of
local computation called operations, and each edge represents either
the outputs or the inputs called Tensors. So the figure here shows the architecture
at a high-level of the TensorFlow platform. So TensorFlow provides a high-level
scripting interface for you to construct these dataflow graphs. This way, users can experiment with
different model architectures. Let's say, you want to add a layer or change the number of operators
in the layer, and so on. You can experiment with all of these model
architectures without actually having to modify the core system. So the core system is just TensorFlow,
it would not change. So you can experiment
with different ML models. So TensorFlow supports both CPUs and
GPUs, and it also supports special processing units called
Tensor Processing Units, or TPUs. So TensorFlow has a distributed master,
which takes user requests and then gives set of tasks
to dataflow executor. And the dataflow executor schedules
the execution of the operators, and it tries to use parallelism
whenever possible. So the runtime of TensorFlow contains many
implementations of standard operations, and it's quite extensible,
so you can add new things. And it also supports different
communication protocols, such as you can use RDMA to directly copy
the data onto a remote nodes memory. It can support direct GPU to GPU transfer,
and so on. Or you can just use RPCs. So here you have an example of
an image classifier that was written using TensorFlow API. So this is an older version of TensorFlow
from the original TensorFlow paper that was published at OSDI. So the new API looks
a little bit different. So as I said in the previous slide,
TensorFlow provides a high-level scripting language for you to write and
construct these dataflow graphs, right? And that's exactly what this example does. So here you're first
creating a graph that is representing the image
classification model. So you have the input layer, and
then you have another hidden layer. Then you also have the weights and
the bias vectors, and then you also have the output layer,
right? So basically,
you're specifying all of these layers, you have the placeholder for the inputs. You have the placeholder for the outputs, and you're basically telling TensorFlow
what the graph would look like. Now, you also tell TensorFlow
how do you compute loss. Right, so you have the labels,
actual labels, and the predicted outputs. How do you compute the loss from them? What's the loss function? And you also tell TensorFlow what
optimizer it should be using. So you specify all of this to TensorFlow,
and then you just initialize the weights to some random values, and
then you can start training. So you load one batch after the other and
do the training. So you can specify all of these in a
high-level language without worrying about a lot of internal details. And that's what TensorFlow makes it
easier for ML developers, right? So the ML developer can experiment with
different model architecture without having to worry about all the underlying
details of how do you communicate between different GPUs. Or how do you pass along the values
between layers, and so on. The TensorFlow framework is going
to take care of that for you. On the developers, the machine
learning developers can just focus on developing the right set of model for
a particular workload. So now let's look at PyTorch, which is another machine learning
framework that's also very popular. So PyTorch was originally
developed by Meta, and it's used in many popular
real-world applications. So one difference between TensorFlow and PyTorch is that while PyTorch
uses the same computation graphs, like similar to TensorFlow, the
computation graphs in PyTorch are dynamic. PyTouch also has this Nice feature where
it can compute variance automatically. So PyTorch implements many popular
algorithms and components, and it also has some domain specific
libraries for text vision, audio, etc. And it also has a lot
of popular data sets. So in PyTorch, again,
you have the same Tensors, right, which are n-dimensional arrays, and then
you have something called the modules. So the modules basically define
what makes up a model, and you need to also implement a forward
member function in every module. For example, if you consider a linear
model and you take a module for it, the module would have a weight and
a bias as parameters. And the forward function
would generate the output by multiplying the input and
the weight and adding a bias to it. So that's a high-level
overview of PyTorch. Now, let's look at a very
simple example here, instead of using a neural network,
I have a very simple model. But the example here focuses
on how to easily exploit data parallelism with PyTorch. So you start with creating
a process group and specifying the distributed communication
package that you're going to use. So here we are using
something called glue. But what I want to focus on here
is how to use data parallelism. So you have a very simple linear
model here that we have defined, so that we're going to use. And you take it and you wrap it with
DDP or distributed data parallel, and then you get your distributed model. Okay, so that's as simple as how do you
get the distributed data parallelism out of PyTorch. So then you do the forward pass,
you do the backward pass, and talk how you specify how to do these things, and
you also update the model parameters. And all of this is similar
to centralized learning. Of course, I'm not telling you
a lot more details, right? So you should look into these
frameworks if you're interested. But this is at a high level how
easy it is to use PyTorch to do distributed data parallelism. So we talked about two popular frameworks. The final popular framework
that I'll talk about is Jax. So Jax is quickly replacing
TensorFlow inside Google. So Jax also provides you with
a very high level API for you to do ML training and inference. So it provides a very
familiar NumPy like API. So Jax has a lot of nice features. One fundamental feature it supports is
that it allows you to compute gradients automatically. So computing gradients,
as you might know now, is a very critical part of ML training. And Jax supports
a transformation called grad, which takes a numerical
function written in Python and returns you a new Python function
that computes gradient automatically. It also supports just in time
compilation of Python functions so that they can be efficiently executed. So there are some other features of Jax. For example, Jax supports a transformation
called vmap that allows you to generate vectorized implementation of
a function automatically. And also Jax supports automatic
parallelization of functions through pmap. So pmap, again, is the transformation that
takes a function written for one device and transforms it into a function that
can run in parallel on multiple devices. So these are some nice
features that Jax supports. And Jax is becoming something that's
become very popular and also replacing TensorFlow within Google for
a number of machine learning applications. So that's at a high level how
these different machine learning frameworks work. If you're interested further, you should go look up these frameworks and
learn more about it. But we just covered a very high level
overview of these frameworks with some examples. So finally we have
federated machine learning. So so far we've been discussing
distributed machine learning, which assumes homogeneous
data across workers. Doesn't mean that the data is the same. It just assumes that one worker does not
have data that's very different from another worker. So the distributions of data on
one worker are not different from other workers, right? That's distributed ML. But we also have federated machine
learning that uses heterogeneous data across workers. So the workers here may be data centers,
or some may be mobile devices, and there might be failures,
possibly even some privacy issues. For example, in Google's Federated
learning paper, they talk about how to use federated learning to
predict keystrokes for mobile devices. The main difference here is
heterogeneous data, right? One worker may have data that has a very
different distribution than what another worker has, so that's at a high level
what federated machine learning is. So that brings us to the end of
this machine learning lecture. Thanks, and if you're interested more
in this topic, I encourage you to read up on these topics more using different
resources that are available on the web. Thank you.