[MUSIC] In this lecture on the Scheduling series, we're going to see dominant-resource
fair scheduling, which is a new concept that has been invented in just the last
few years but has had a lot of impact. So here,
we're discussing the problem of scheduling large numbers of jobs across a cluster. For instance, scaling VMs in a cloud or
in a cluster. Different jobs may have
different requirements and these requirements may
span multiple resources. So for instance, a Job 1 may have tasks
where each task requires 2 CPUs and 8 GB. Job 2 may have tasks where each
task requires 6 CPUs and 2 GB. So then the questions arise, when you have
these jobs that are together in a cluster, how do you schedule these jobs in a manner
that is fair across different jobs? In other words, how many tasks of
each job, in this particular example, our example, do we allow in
the cluster to run concurrently. So that you ensure fairness
as far as resource allocation is concerned
across different jobs? In fact, what does fairness even
mean in this particular case? So, dominant resource fairness, or
DRF, addresses these questions. It was proposed by researchers from
University of California at Berkeley. It proposes a notion of fairness across
jobs with where the jobs have multiple, multi-resource requirements. And the researchers showed that
the dominant resource fairness is fair for multi-tenant systems. It is strategy-proof. This means that a tenants
can not benefit by lying. So if a tenant lies
about it's requirements it does not really benefit by it. It can only suffer or
just stay where it is. It's also envy-free which means that a
tenant can not envy the allocation that is given to another tenant in the system. All of these are desirable
properties because they eliminate the tenants from strategizing
the system and from gaming the system. So, DRF is useful in scheduling
virtual machines in a cluster. It's also useful in scheduling
Hadoop in a cluster. It's, it's, it's useful very,
very, hard jobs and these jobs have tasks that which need to
be scheduled in a cluster and that and the tasks themselves have
multi-resource requirements. DRF is used in Mesos, an operating system that was
invented by researchers at Berkeley. That is intended and the operating system
is intended as a distributed operating system for cloud environments. And DRF-like strategies are also
used in cloud computing operating systems that have been built
by several cloud computing companies. How does DRF work? Well, let's look at DRF
through our example. So, Job 1, once again, our example, has tasks where each task
requires 2 CPUs and 8 GB. We denote that as Job 1's resource vector,
which consists of 2 CPUs, 8 GB, where 8 GB is the RAM or
the memory required by the job. Job 2's task required 6 CPUs and
2 gigabytes. And so its resource vector is 6, 2. Now consider a cloud or a data center
which has 18 CPUs and 36 gigabytes of RAM. That's the resource vector
of the cloud itself. Now, let's look at Job 1. So, each task of Job 1 consumes
a percentage of total CPUs which is, it, it requires 2 CPUs and the total
number of CPUs in the cloud is 18. So the percent of the total CPUs consumed
by one task from Job 1 is 2 by 18 which is 1 over 9. Similarly, each task of Job
1 requires 8 GB of RAM. The total RAM present in
the cluster is 36, so the percentage consumed by each task
of Job 1 is 8 by 36 which is 2 by 9. So, 1 by 9 is less than 2 by 9, which means that Job 1's dominant resource
is the orange resource, which is RAM. So Job 1 is more memory intensive, or
RAM-intensive than it is a CPU-intensive. So that's Job 1. Let's do a similar calculation for Job 2. Job 2's single task,
consumes percentage of total CPUs which is 6 CPUs divided by 18 total CPUs,
that's 6 by 18. As far as RAM is concerned,
each consumes 2 GB of RAM, and the total GB of RAM is 36, so
that's 2 by 36, which is 1 by 18. Here in the blue value, 6 by 18 is
larger than the orange value, and so 6 by 18 is greater than 1 by 18. Which means that Job 2's
dominates resource is CPU, so it is more CPU-intensive
than it is memory-intensive. So Job 1's dominant resource was RAM and
Job 2's dominant resource is CPU. So different jobs may have different
resource types that they are dominant on. And DRF ensures the following property. For a given job, the percentage of
its dominant resource type that it gets cluster-wide is the same for
all jobs. In other words the, you allocate tasks to
Job 1 and you allocate tasks to Job 2. So that the total percentage of
RAM that Job 1's total tasks get is equal to the total percentage
of CPU that Job 2's tasks get. Because RAM is the dominate
resource of Job 1 and CPU is the dominate resource of Job 2. These constraints can be written
as linear equations and solved. We won't go through those equations and solutions here, maybe just tell you
the solution for our particular example. Okay?
So for our example the the solutions turns out to be that Job 1 get's three tasks
each with a resource factor of 2 CPUs and 8 GB. And Job 2 gets two tasks each with
a resource factor of 6 CPUs and 2 GB. Let's ensure that this actually
satisfies the DRF fairness rule. So Job 1's percentage of RAM is the total
number of tasks given to Job 1 times the amount of RAM per task,
that's the total RAM to Job 1, the numerator,
divided by the total cluster RAM. So the number of tasks it gets is 3
times 8 GB per task, divided by 36 GB. That's 2 by 3. That's do the similar calculation for
Job 2's dominant resource which is CPU. The number of tasks given to Job 2 is 2. The CPU per task is 6 CPUs. Divide the total number of
cluster CPUs which is 18. So that's 2 times 6 by 18
which is also 2 over 3. So that's the that ensures
that Job 1's percentage of RAM equals the Job 2's percentage of CPU. So every job gets the same
percentage of the cluster as far as its dominant resource is concerned. And you can verify that allocating Job 1
three tasks and allocating Job 2 two tasks also satisfies the total number of
resources that you have, right? So Job 1 gets 3 times 2,
6 CPUs, Job 2 gets 2 times 6, 8 12 CPUs, so that's a total of 18 CPUs. You do have 18 CPUs in the system. The RAM given to Job 1 is 3 times 8, 24. Job 2 gets 2 times 2, 4, so that's 28 GB
which is less than the 36 GB we have. So you're using less than the total
amount of memory in your system. But that's fine, because it's the price
you pay for fairness in your system. So, DRF even though we've discussed
it only for two types of resources, a, the, a resource that has only two
components, the CPU and the RAM. It also generalize, generalizes to cases where jobs might
have multiple resource requirements. It also to generalizes the cases
where you have multiple jobs, not just two jobs in your system. So you can have multiple jobs, and
each job can have CPU requirements, memory requirements, also network, and maybe disk
requirements, and so on and so forth. And DRF will generalize even to those. DRF essentially, essentially insures that each job gets
a fair share of that type of resource, which that particular job desires
the most, meaning it's dominant resource. And this is why DRF is, in fact, fair across different jobs with
multi-resource requirements. So to wrap up our entire discussion of
scheduling, scheduling is a very important problem in cloud computing because
you have limited resources. Typically processor and
the memory resources and you have a lot of jobs with tasks that
require access to these resources. So which jobs run when on which
resources is a scheduling problem. We've discussed classical single-process
scheduling algorithms such as First in Fist Out, shortest task first,
Priority and Round-Robin. We've also discussed Hadoop scheduling
strategies that are popular today, such as capacity scheduler,
and the Hadoop fair scheduler. And finally, we've discuss strategies
that are fair across multiple tenants in a multi-tenant cloud environment. Especially we've discussed
the dominant-resource fairness strategy, which is actually gaining
popularity today. [MUSIC]