[MUSIC]. Hi, there. In this lecture, we're going to
see a little bit about, sensors, which have emerged in the last decade or so, and wireless networks,
that might be joining them. What do I mean by a sensor? This is an example of a sensor I have
here, which was originally, fabricated, by researchers at Berkeley. Then, later on made by
a company called Crossbow, which is later on being,
acquired by another company, Moog. I'll tell you a little bit more
about these kinds of sensors, why they have emerged,
and so on and so forth. But let's start at a much more,
broader or, higher level. So, everything is getting smaller or,
all around us. In fact, the smallest state-of-the-art
transistor that is being made today, is can be made from a single gold atom. Of course, this is still in research,
not yet in industry. But just imagine a world
where you could make a, a transistor of just one gold atom. And let's do some calculations just for
fun. Pentium P4,
which is a fairly old processor by Intel, contains about 42 million transistors. The atomic weight of
gold is about 196 to 200, depending on which isotope you look at. 1 gram of gold contains, 3 times 10 to,
10 the 21 atoms, which means that, if you use all the atoms correctly to
make one pros, one transistor each, then you can make, 7.5 times 10 to the 18
Pentium 4 processors for one gram of gold. Which means that from 1 gram of gold,
you have enough processors, Pentium 4 processors, to, give each person in
the world a billion Pentium 4 processors. That's with just 1 gram of gold, okay. So, you can imagine that as these, what
are known as form factors get smaller and smaller, as the sizes get smaller, you can
make many more of these, sensor nodes. Many more of these processors. In general, the speed of the CPU is,
greatly proportional to the square root of the transistors that
you can put on the dye. So, we are not talking very far from
reality with these ballpark calculations, but of course, we are pretty far, from,
this reality because after all you still cannot make, in a production,
a transistor from 1 gold atom. But essentially, the point I am trying to make here is
that everything is getting smaller. And it's easier and
easier to make, smaller computers, such as, this one over here. [SOUND] So, sensors have been around for
a long time. Coal mines have used, and
all kinds of mines have used, sensors for carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide. In the old days,
when we did not have technology, these, sensors used to be birds in cages. This is where, canary in a coal mine,
the phrase comes from. Essentially, if the bird died,
you knew that something was wrong, that the level of carbon monoxide in the
mine might be too high and it was time for the miners to get out. Today of course,
many mines in the world, not all, but many mines use,
advanced technology sensors. Industry has used sensors for
a long time, for instance, on the assembly line where cars are being
manufactured one step at a time, you need to use sensors so that
the assembly line is moving all the time. Today, however,
we deal with excessive information and we need to process this information
data and convert it into knowledge. For instance, environmentalists might want to collect
data on an island which is uninhabited. Where there are no people and where,
the terrain may be inhospitable. Armies might want to collect data
in the battlefield, without, putting the lives of the soldiers at risk. And in general, humans, want to collect their data from
across a wide geographical area. For instance, they're on the volcano, where they might to measure earthquake
movement, volcanic movement, and, predict the movement of
the volcano's base on the sensors. You really don't want to have people
over there, monkeying around, when a volcano might erupt
at any point in time. And this is where sensor networking
technology comes into place. Where you might deep lie, say a few
hundred of these around the volcano and, then, detect, acoustic movements, which might, hint at the volcano
erupting in the near future. So, the growth of any technology, such as
in sen, in sensor networking technology. But in reality, any technology
requires three components in there. It needs hardware, good hardware. It needs good operating systems and
distributive protocols, especially when you have, the hundreds of
these sensors networked with each other. And of course, you need applications. We won't talk much about the applications. Let me just say that. There are both military applications,
for these sensor networks, as well as civilian applications,
such as the environmental observation, as well as the, case of,
monitoring volcanoes. So, these sensor networks
have been deployed in cases, where you want to monitor,
the movement of whales in the ocean, where each whale has been fitted out with
a sensor, where you want to monitor the, temperature and humidity in a forest,
in, in, in an island, and for instance, the Great Duck Island, which is one of the islands that
has a very interesting ecosystem. It was outfitted with sensors
to measure the temperature and humidity inside the forest. And then, of course the volcanoes in,
South America have been outfitted with, sensor networks to measure their activity. So, let's discuss the other two. The sensor nodes themselves have emerged,
because of several trends. First of all, there is, Moore's Law
which says that, in general Moore's Law, has said that, the processing capacity,
doubles every 80 months. Nowadays, this processing capacity stands
more for, the number of processors you can put per dye and less for
the CPU speed, but in general, over the last, few decades, Moore's Law
has made processors faster and faster. Wireless communications also advanced,
and then finally, you have MEMS, which is known as
micro electro mechanical sensors. Where essentially, you have sensors
that convert some form of energy into electrical, into an electrical impulse,
which can then be sent to a processor, so that the processor can then process it. And that's essentially what's going on
with, these sensor boards over here. So, you have this, board,
which has, the processor over here, you can see it's a 900 MHz processor here. And then,
it has a little bit of memory on it. I see a little about, how its memory,
it has in a little bit, but what you do is attach this sensor bolt,
which has a bunch of sensors on it. So, this has an acoustic sensor, a sound
box, thermometer, and a few other sensors. And, you attach it on
top of this essentially. [SOUND] Let me make sure I'm
getting this the right way here. And voila, you have a working sensor. A sensor board, where the sensors on
this top board, can convert some form of energy, for instance, the, the microphone
on this would be able to convert sound energy into electrical impulse,
which is then sent over to the processor. Which is also on the board over here,
which can then process it accordingly, according to the application
that you've written. Second, it needs a microprocessor
as you've seen here. Third, it needs a communication link and in this case you have
this wireless antennae. So, this is a,
this is the wireless communication link. So, that this sensor, mote can then
talk with other sensor motes out there. And they can network together
in a wireless, network. And finally, you need a power source. because these are likely to be
deployed in, the, in terrains where, it may not be possible for
humans to go out there and recharge them. And, of course, it may not be possible to, power them using just regular
AC electricity off the wall. You need batteries. And this has, this particular model
has two AA batteries, running on it. So, the sizes of these
motes are very small. This mote that I've shown
you is called a MICA mote. Or a MICA mote. And then, there are smaller
models of a MicaDot mote, which is also manufactured by the same company
is, smaller, it's also running the same. CPU 900 megahertz and it has,
as you can notice, a wireless antennae. Intel Motes were manufactured by Intel
subsequently here is an example of an Intel Mote for you, and
Intel Mote typically has an arm processor. Here I have, the Intel Mote has two
pieces, the sensor board is on top. This is sensor board over here, and
then the other board is in the bottom. And you can see it says
Intel Research over here. And of course, it has batteries. In this case, they are lithium batteries,
running over here. ' Kay and there is an on button here, you
switch it on and after a while, well you can see that it starts blinking over here,
which means that well now it's active. It went from white to blue and
it means that it's now active. K, switch that off. And then there are other sensor,
motes like this which have been created that are even smaller,
for instance Golem Dust, which is one of the sensor motes that
is created by Oxboro by Cross-bo, had a volume of only a few cubic
millimeter, which is really, really small. It's much smaller than a typical
penny coin that you might find. In any case, in all these sensors
everything is on one chip. So you know, you notice that when you
have sens, this processing board and this sensing board everything
is on just one chip. You know, there is no other
peripherals you can attach to this. There is no disk over here. There is no monitor over here, there is
no mouse, there is no keyboard to this. Everything is on one chip. So this consists of the processor the
transceiver, which is a fancy word to say transporter receiver,
essentially this is the wireless antenna. The battery the sensors,
and also the of memory and of course buses to connect
the memory with the processors. These are very wimpy machines. The MICA mote, for instance,
has a 4 megahertz processor. It's got a wireless bandwidth of
about 40 kilobytes per second. It's got only 4 kilobytes of RAM, so
that's the amount of RAM you have. Not 4 megabytes, not 4 gigabytes,
which you might find on your. Workstations today, but
just for kilobytes. This is really, really puny. This is very tiny. It has 512 kilobytes of serial flash. But essentially, you need to fit almost everything in
the program on four kilobytes of RAM. If you let it run for on full blast
on the batteries, then it lasts for only seven days,
which means that it's very important. For programs if you like to conserve
the energy, to conserve the battery. You don't want to be running
at full blast all the time. You want to potentially go to
sleep at some point of time. So that the sensor net,
node can save its energy for later on. So there are many different kinds
of sensors that are available, you could have acceleration sensors,
vibration sensors which might be useful on the battlefield to detect tanks sound
sensors, gyroscope sensors tilt, magnetic, motion, pressure,
temperature of course. A light humidity moisture barometric,
but ideal can be outfitted and in fact these sensor boards can be daisy
chain on top of each other, so you can take one and put it on top of this and
then you can stack them on as you desire. Other requirements for instance,
in some of the metros and some of the larger cities in
the world have used chemical sensors, such as carbon monoxide,
carbon dioxide, and radon sensors. As well as biological sensors,
which detect pathogens. In some cases, actuators are used
to these involved mirrors, motors, smart surfaces, and micro-robots. So when you have sensors in the same boat
as a processor, how do you connect them? Well typically, on these voltages the bus
has to be a low-power and fast bus. And the bus using these is called an,
an, called the I to C bus, or the Inter-I-C connect bus. This is developed by Phillips. This connects the sensors
to the microprocessors. It's very simply. It has only two wires. Whether the wires are bidirectional. One of them is for data. It's called a serial data bus. The other one is for the clock
which is called a serial clock bus. The serial clock bus is typically used
to make sure that the sensors and the processors are talking
at the same speed, so that they can send data to each
other over the serial data bus. Even though this has only two wires,
it has a fairly high bandwidth, 3.4 megabits per second which is high
enough for a computer as puny as this. What about the transmission medium? Well on, in all of these cases whether
it's a MICA whether it's the MICA dot or whether it's the. The communication medium is radio
frequency which is a typical communication medium that for instance your cellphone or your laptop users when it
talks to a bay station. Essentially, you're sending RF
waves out over the wireless medium. This is a broadcast medium which means
that when one sensor is talking to another, the second sensor needs to
receive the packet from the first sensor store it, process it, and
then forward it to the next sensor. Links are typically bidirectional
which means that when Sensor A can hear Sensor B, it's also
true that Sensor B can hear Sensor A. What do I mean by broadcast? This means that when a sensor transmits,
any sensor within hearing range, no matter which direction it is
in can receive its transmission. When you go smaller, when the, when you're talking about Smart Dust which
is a really small smaller than a penny. Sensor node. RF is not necessarily attractive
because it has high frequency and it consumes a lot of power. And in those smaller form factors,
you really don't have enough battery saved up in your battery
to support RF communication. Instead you want to support
optical transmission. Some of these smaller motors
support optical transmission. This involves simpler hardware and
it consumes lower power. However it comes with a few challenges. Here optical transmission essentially
means that you have a laser, right? You have one sensor its packets
via laser to another sensor and this means that you don't have
a broadcast medium anymore. You have a direction and you need to make sure that the laser
is pointed at the receiving sensor. Broadcasts can be expensive, you can't necessarily send out a packet to
all of the sensors in your hearing range, you need to direct it to every sensor
that you want to send a packet to. Line of sight is required. Laser cannot go through walls. So you need to make sure that
the receiving sensor is within viewing distance of the sending sensor. In some cases you may need
to move antennas around because if you want to direct the laser
accurately the receiving sensor, this involves mechanical antenna movements
that might use up a bit of energy. So switching links might be costly. However one of the advantages is that
you can use emitters to go out on one. So you can use an intermediate sensor
which simply reflects your being. This is known as wormhole routing, where
the intermediate sensor is not storing and forwarding packets,
like R-F communication. But instead, instead is simply
routing the packet as is via a mirror. So this is fairly fast. Finally, the links are unidirectional. So sensor a will be able to send to
sensor b doesn't mean that sensor b is laser beam optical transmission. As directly I can say is maybe
do that at somewhere else. So to summarize the sensor node
discussion, the size of these sensor nodes are very small,
just a few millimeters to a few inches. The have limited processing and
communication. They're very puny, just a few megahertz
of clock, just a few megabytes of flash, just a few kilobytes of RAM. And a few tens of kilobytes of,
kilobytes per second of wireless. In some cases,
a few hundreds of kilobytes per second. They have limited power. They are typically
running on batteries and you cannot recharge those batteries
in inhospitable terrains. So you need to be sure that you can
conserve, energy when you write code for these sensor nodes. They are also failure prone and
bodies nodes are failure prone, as well as links are failure prone. So, you know,
if you deploy this in the battlefield a tank might run over it and destroy it. If you deploy it in the forest an animal
might come and destroy it or just eat it. Also the links are failure prone, so, you know, if you send out
a packet over the wireless medium, it might get dropped because there
is noise in the wireless medium. But, of course, they're easy to
manufacture and deploy in large numbers. And so, you need to offset this with,
protocols, just protocols and operating system design that are scalable,
that's scaled a very large numbers of these sensor nodes
talking with each other. And also there are fault order that work,
when the protocols work in spite of the fact some of these
sensor nodes might fail. So, what about the operating system? What operating system do
sensor nodes like this, run? Well, there's a few,
considerations here when you want to, run, when you want to build
an operating system. First, you want your operating system
to be small because you only have a few kilobytes of RAM,
4 kilobytes of RAM on the MICA mote. You need your operating system to,
compact and fit in memory, very compactly. Embedded operating systems, which run on,
you know, intelligent washing machines and intelligent, microwaves, for instance,
are not applicable because they use several hundreds of kilobytes of,
read-only memory or hundreds of kilobytes of, memory, and
they won't fit on the sensor mode. You need to worry about what your
work load characteristics are for these sensors nodes, typically the work
load characteristics are bursty. Typically, the sensor motes are not doing
anything until something interesting happens in the neighborhood. For instance, there is,
a tank movement or, there is some rumbling on
the surface of the volcano. You want to use,
reuse these sense, sensor nodes, you don't want to build a sensor mote that
is specifically built for the volcano. You want to reuse the same, board, for
the enemy battle tank, deployment as well. And finally,
you need to worry about scheduling and real time, characteristics where you
want to process things very quickly. Of course, you want to make sure that
these sensors don't consume much power and that the communication is also optimized. So, all of these requirements were,
summarized by researchers at Berkeley who built the operating system known
as the TinyOS operating system for these small devices. So, the MICA mote over here is
running TinyOS operating system. The MicaDot is running the TinyOS
operating system too, and, many versions of the Intel mote are also running,
obedient of the TinyOS operating system. So, the fact that you need bursty data for
different computations, the fact that you want to support multiple data
streams, the fact that you want real-time computations and power conservation, and
as we've discussed on the last slide. All of these led to TinyOS being an
event-driven execution, a reactive mote. So, unlike your, workstation and
laptop which are always running something, some process all the time, these, motes
might actually go to sleep when there's nothing interesting going
on in the neighborhood. When something interesting happens,
these motes then react and then might, might undertake some computation in
order to react to that, stimulus. Also you want your OS to be small,
operating system to be small and you want to accommodate a diverse
set of applications and these led the researchers,
to build a modular operating system with modular structure and components with
clean interfaces between these components. So, in order to program these
TinyOS Motes, yes you can program these. You use a, language called NesC,
which stands for 'nest at C'. It's a variant of C, so, if you're familiar with C or
C++, NesC should be fairly easy. NesC defines components, and a component
can be either a module or a configuration. A module, specifies a set of methods and
some internal storage. This is sort of like a Java class. Essentially it is a Java class with it's
own internal storage, a few fields, and a few methods to access those fields. But it's a static Java class, and,
why do you want a static Java class, because you have limited memory, you don't really want dynamic memory
allocation on these, small devices. You could write a module that
corresponds to hardware element. This would be sort of like
the device driver for that element. For instance for the clock or for the LED,
or, it will use a defined software module, for instance, for the routing protocol among the sensors,
that are connected in the network. Module is implemented using interfaces. This is just like, you know,
your regular Java classes, so that, other modules can then
call the methods in this module. So, now, you can wire these modules
together by having one module call method, methods in other module, and these are,
this together is called a configuration. It's a program that you write where you
have multiple modules that are talking with each other by calling each
other's methods that will be called a configuration. A complete NesC application consists
of one configuration where you have multiple modules and
they're talking with each other. So, component invocation is event driven, which means that, components don't,
start executing just by themselves. They start executing only when
they're invoked by some other event. So, for instance, when something
interesting happens in the neighborhood, when, the, when there is a vibration for instance, the, acoustic sensor,
might come into play. That particular module that runs
the acoustic sensor might run. It might then call, the routing module
which will then transfer the packet over to another sensor mote. You have static allocation here only here
you typically you don't have dynamic allocation because you don't want to have,
run-time overhead being incurred, when, you have only limited
amounts of memory available. You can also do real-time scheduling, both hard real-time scheduling
where you have deadlines for tasks, as well as soft real-time scheduling
where you have soft deadlines for tasks. And finally, you have explicit
interfaces by these modules so that you can accommodate
different applications. A routing module that you write for,
the volcanic deployment, could be reused in the, in the enemy
battle tank deployment scenario, as well. Once you've written your application, and
this discussion applies to the MICA Mote over here, you will write your
application on your laptop or workstation, let's say that's your PC. It could be a NesC program. You will compile it to an executable,
for the mote. You will then simulate it and
debug it, on your PC itself, on your, workstation, laptop, whatever. But without, but
before deploying it on the mote itself. It's easier to simulate it on your
workstation and easy to debug it there. TinyOS typically comes mounted with
a TinyOS simulator known as TOSSIM, which allows you to simulate, hundreds of
sensor motes talking with each other and executing your program so that you can
now debug your application very easily. Then, typically, for the MICA mote, you plug your mote into,
the port on your machine. So, you know, you plug your mote in here
and this would go into your machine and you download the program onto the mote and then, it's running your
program when you switch it on. Some of the newer versions of motes allow
you to download the program wireless over the wireless link
onto the mote itself. And when you turn on your mote,
it is running your application. Most of these motes run only one
application at a time, but you can modify the Tiny OS operating system to support,
multiple applications running as well. So, what about energy savings? So, these have very limited,
a battery supply, and they're typically running in terrain, in, in scenarios
where it's difficult to recharge them. So, these motes, like the MICA motes,
come with multiple power saving motes. They could either be active,
idle, or sleep. Sleep means, you know, typically,
the MICA mote is asleep, it might wake up after a while or it might
wake up when, one of the sensors goes on. Active means that the MICA mote is
sending and receiving messages. Idle means that it is alive. It's awake but it's not necessarily
doing anything interesting. It may be computing something but
it's not sending and receiving messages. Now, there's a tremendous variance
in energy supply and demand. You could use batteries,
you could use solar cells. You could use vibration to power your
batteries and recharge your batteries. And in some cases,
if you're deploying the sensor motes, some of these sensor motes in a building
or in a bridge, you might actually be able to use, power, off the wall, off the AC
socket of the wall to charge these. So, you don't need necessarily need to
worry about recharging the batteries or replacing the batteries. In essence, you need to worry about, sources when you think about what
your deployment requirements are. If you have a long term
deployment requirement, while you're deploying these in
inhospitable terrains then, eh, yeah, you want to make sure that
you are conserving power. So, short term deployment, then,
you could worry less about, about power. Also, how much bandwidth is being used
by application is another thing that you need to worry about. Some numbers here from,
the two AA batteries being used, this consumes 200 microamps
of average current. This will not mean much in this particular
scenario, but it's an interesting fact. So, the TinyOS, itself is a fairly small,
operating system. The software footprint
is just 3.4 kilobytes, which fits just about perfectly
on the 4 kilobytes of RAM. That is there on these Mica modes. But this also means that you
can't really load a lot of data. You need to process data rather
than just store data on there. Power saving modes as we've discussed
are active, idle, and sleep. Although of all of the capabilities on
this Mica mode the radio transmission is the most expensive it
consumes the most power. It consumes 12 milliamps of power. The second, highest, consuming, power consuming capability is a CPU
being active that is consuming, that is computing actively, which
consumes only 4.6 milliamps of power. This essentially means that your,
when you have a program, for these mi for these Mica modes. You, you may want to prefer computation
over transmission of data so it's much better for you to compute
something, compute an average and then send over the average rather
than send over the raw data itself. And this has led to many in-network
aggregation approaches being used for sensor networks but these sensors are taking to each
other over the wireless network. Essentially in these network aggregation
approaches you would build trees among the sensor nodes, with the base
station at the root of the tree. And internal nodes would receive
values from their children, would compute an average of these values,
or some other summary. And then transmit,
these values up to their parent. And finally the base station which
is at the root of the tree gets, the summary value the final average value. This is far more efficient
than either sending, the raw values over to the base station. All communicating directly with the base
station which involves far more power because they're sending
over much longer distances. It also allows the base station to be
fairly far from, the center of action. For instance, you don't want the base
station to be near the volcano, you want it to be far away. So this is also the correct, sensor nodes
also have the correct direction for the future technology because today's
growth rates are that the data, the size of the data is growing
much faster than the than the cost effectiveness of storage. Which in turn is growing much
faster than the speed of CPU. Which in turn is growing much faster
than the speed of communication. Growth which in turn is growing
much faster than the battery. So the energy stores,
the batteries themselves, are growing at the smallest rate. Due to hostile environments
whether they're battlefields or they're environmental scenarios
as well as the cheap fabrication, you could have higher failure
rates in sensor nodes. And so you need these sensor networks,
to be self-organizing, you need them to be self-managing,
you need them to be self-healing. When a failure occurs, you want
the sensor networks themselves, to, figure out new paths to,
send the data to the base station. And finally you want, these,
distributed protocols to be scalable. You want the number of messages to scale
well as the number of sensors, grows. So if the number of sensors doubles and
your, you know the number of messages goes up by
a quadratic goes up by a factor of four, that's not a good, scalable protocol. You want it to be growing up, linearly, if possible sub linearly,
as the size of the network grows. In general related to this direction
of sensor nodes are a couple of other directions that have also emerged,
recently. ASICs known as Application-Specific
Integrated Chips are chips that are built for specific applications and
those can be used on the sensor nodes. FPGAs are Field Programmable Gate Arrays
where you can actually program the hardware itself for a specific application have also
emerged in the last few years. These are of course much faster because
you are moving a lot of capability and functionality into the hardware and anything you can put into hardware is
much faster than doing it in software. Sensor nodes are cheap and
battery limited, you can deploy them in inhospitable
terrains whether they're deployments or on, on the periphery of a volcano or in
an island to monitor, heat and humidity. But you need to conserve power because
it's difficult to recharge these sensor nodes, frequently. So you need to be smart about
the design of the operating system and the TinyOS operating system has
been built exactly for this. And you also need to build distributed
protocols, very very well. We've discussed the design of TinyOS and
a few challenges where it comes to designing distributed protocols for
these scenarios. Related to this discussion are, are a few
other topics that you can look up, the Raspberry PI and Arduino platforms
that have emerged in the last few years which allow you to program small
manageable computers very easily. And you might want to look these up these are very interesting
topics if you have not heard about them. Home automation systems use a lot of
sensors these include companies such Nest, AMX, Homelogic, Honeywell, etc. Typically these are sensors that
control the temperature in your home or control the locks, in your home. The power concerns are smaller because
they're typically connected to easy power but you have security and
accuracy concerns here. You want your,
home automated assistance to be accurate. To let you in the door, to set the correct
temperature when you so desire. Typically it's possible to network these
devices together in your home these are known as internet of things. That's a, key phrase you will hear,
essentially this means that you're, eh, you're networking many devices,
many of these, sensors together, into a network and you are then managing
them together over the network. Often these are known as Cyberphysical
systems when you have human beings involved along with sensors and devices networked with each other,
these are known as Cyberphysical systems. Cars and vehicles today for instance have
become networks have become networks of sensors where you have sensors at
the tires monitoring the pressure. You have sensors in the engine
monitoring the status of the engine and all these are talking with each other. And I've been reading the alerts to you
on your dashboard when you're driving. These combinations of humans and machines
are often called cyberphysical systems and these are becoming more and
more wide spread. For instance in operation
theaters in hospitals, doctors are increasingly
using machines around them. To make sure that there is more accuracy
and in the operations itself and that the doctors being assist are being
assisted as much as possible. [MUSIC]