[MUSIC] So after having seen what a vanilla
distributed file system looks like we are going to see a couple
of real file systems. The NFS file system and AFS file system. These are very popular and
continue to be used even today. First then, our first file system
it's the Network File System. It was developed by
Sun Microsystems in the 1980s and it continues to be used widely today. Both in clusters, data centers,
as well as in smaller scale clusters. So here is what NFS
architecture looks like. And then you know, I'll, I'll displayed out in more
detail over the next two slides. So you have the server machine, of course. And, you have multiple client machines. On the client machines, there might be multiple processes
that are trying to access the files. The processes execute operations with what
is known as a virtual file system module. You'll notice that there is a virtual file
system module also on the server side. Over here, on the right. When a process makes a call to
the virtual file system module. It then decides depending on whether
the file is local or remote. Whether to relay the call to
the local Unix File system or to the NSF Client system. If the file is local,
then the Unix File system is accessed. And that in turns accesses the local disk. And then returns the information
directly to the process. However the file is remote if
it is located on the server, then the NFS Client system forwards
the request to the NFS Server system. This is done via typically an RPC. And then the NFS Server system forwards
the request to the virtual file system on the server side. Which then forwards it to the Unix
file system on the server side. Because after all on the server,
the file is stored on local disk and the file is then accessed
from the local disk. Then, the information about the file, such as a blog being read is done on
the reverse path shown by these arrows. So you'll notice a few components here. The NFS Client system, the NFS Server
system, and the Virtual File System. Let's s, go into a little bit more detail. The NFS Client system is similar to our
Client service that we discussed in the vanilla distributed file system. Here it is integrated with the kernel,
that is with the OS, so it executes in the,
with kernel level privileges. Okay. It performs RPCs to the NFS Server
system whenever distributed file system operations are involved. The NFS Server system pays the role
of both the Flat file service and the Directory service from
Vanilla Directory file system. Which we discussed in
the previous lecture. NFS allows mounting of files and
directories. This means that clients can mount a remote
directories to a local directory name. For instance,
if you mount a /user/edison/inventions into a local directory
/user/tesla/my_competitors. Now user/tesla/my competitors/foo actually refers to user/edison/inventions/foo. Okay? So mounting doesn't copy files over. Instead it just creates a pointer
to the original directory so that now you may use a pseudonym. A, a clone name to refer to those files. It makes it convenient for users as well
as processes to refer name files name, directories, and
access files and directories. What about the virtual file system module,
which is present in more, the client side than the server side? That's the third module
we saw on that figure. The virtual file system module
allows processes to access files via file descriptors. Well, this is, this should kind of,
surprise you at the beginning. Because we discussed in the vanilla
distributed file system that vanilla distributed file system
does not use file descriptors. Primarily because our item
portance requirements. However, you want to use file descriptors
because you want to have transparency. You want processes to be able to access
local and remote files while the same API. And since local files are accessed
using file descriptors, you want to support the same for
remote files as well. That's what is supported by
the virtual file system modules. Okay.
So as far as client processes are concerned, they access local and remote files via
the same API using file descriptors. But when an access is received by
the vir-, virtual file system module, or the VFS module. It decides whether to route it
to the local file system or to the NFS Client system. And here is where the translation
from file descriptors to the item item portent operations happens. Okay? So all the files, local or
remote, are named uniquely, using NFS file handles by
the virtual file system module. The virtual file system keeps the data
structure for each mounted file system. It also keeps a data structure for
each file it opens. This is called a v-node data structure. Okay.
Here's where the translation happens. If the file is local, that is,
stored locally on the client machine, then the v-node points to the local
disk address, called the i-node block. However, if the file is remote, then the v-node contains the address
of the remote NFS server. So that RPC's can now be sent to that NFS
server to obtain blocks of that file. Okay so here is where, this data section, the v-node data structure maintained
by the virtual file system module. Is the one that does
the translation between the stateful non-item
portent file descriptors. And the stateless behavior item
portent operations that we really desire from
the distributed file system. Now, NFS uses server optimizations and these are the main reasons why,
optimi, why NFS is a fast system. Server caching is one
of those optimizations. It's useful for doing, reads. Essentially on the server side,
you store in memory, in RAM, some of the recently accessed
blocks of files and directories. ' Kay, now this might be blocked access
by a different kind of processes, different machines but why does this work? Well this works because most programs
written by humans tend to have what is known as locality of access. Locality of access essentially
says that if a program or a process has accessed
a block in the recent past. It's going to be, it's likely going to
be accessed in the near future again. This means that if you
store that block in memory you can then access those near future
accesses to that, to that block. And be done very very quickly. Instead of going to disk you simply
access the block from memory itself. Then when you do a write at the server. Then, our write is received at the server. There are two flavors in
which this can be done. The first is known as a delay write. The second is a write-through. In delayed write flavor, you write
you do that write only in memory. You don't write or list immediately. Instead periodically, say every
30 seconds, you flush it to disk. Okay? This is done, for instance,
via Unix sync, sync operation. This is fast because the write can, write can be now undone in memory fairly
quickly, but it may not be consistent. Why is it not consistent? Well, if you, if you, if the server
crashes before it does the next sync. Then any of the writes
that are put in memory, but not yet
flushed to disk might in fact be lost. If you want to be really consistent,
you should use write-through. Write-through whenever a client
write is received at the server is essentially,
write is done immediately to disk. Before ack is sent to the client. This ensures the best consistency that all
the rights are in fact are done durably on the server side. But it may be slow because it
involves disk seek and a disk write. What about on the client side? Well on the client side
too you can do caching. So you don't you, you don't need to block,
cache blocks only on the server side. Clients can also cache because your
locality of access it also true for each process. So, a client caches
the recently accessed blocks. Each block that is present in the cache
on the client side is tagged. With the time at which the cache entry
was last validated, known as Tc. And also, Tm, the time at which the block
was last modified at the server. A cache entry, at a given time,
T, is said to be valid, if the difference between T and
Tc is less than a small, value of small t. Or, if, the, time at which the,
block was last modified at the server is the same as,
the time stamp that is made at the client. 'Kay.
So, in the second donation is true. Essentially, you're saying that
a copy of the the file or the block. And the client has the same as
the copy of the block and the server. But, doing this second operation
requires you to do an RPC to the server. Which maybe expensive and
it may involve somewhat of latency. To award that RPC, you give some amount of
elasticity to the block you are restoring. And say that hey,
the block is less than small t old, I'm going to still consider
that block as being fresh. 'Kay, so
T is known as the freshness interval. This is a compromise between
consistency and efficiency. If the value of T is very, very small,
essentially, say T is zero for instance, then essentially it means
that you will never do this check. You would always go and
query the server for its time stamp. Okay, so that's the most consistent
system, but it may be fairly slow. If the value of T, small T is large
it means that you are willing to tolerate some amount of staleness for
fast accesses. Typically this value of T is set to be set
adaptively by a system like Sun Solaris. Sets T adaptively between
3 to 30 seconds for files. And between 30 to 60 seconds for
directories. When on the client side,
when a block is written by the process, you do a delayed write to server. Because after all,
if you have a non zero value for small t,
you're going to have stale blocks anyways. So you might as well do a delayed write
which is a more efficient form of doing the write. So that was NFS,
now let's quickly discuss AFS. We won't discuss all
the design details of AFS, we'll discuss a few design details
that are kind of interesting. So the name Andrew in
Andrew File System name comes from the Andrew in Andrew Carnegie and
Andrew Mellon. Who are the cofounders of
the Carnegie Mellon University. And is not, should be a surprise to you
that AFS was in fact designed at CMU. Which is how its name came about to be. It's used in many clusters today,
especially in University labs. So, AFS involves two very interesting
design decisions whole file serving and whole file caching. So, earlier when we discusses NFS, we were talking about block being cached
on the server side and on the client side. AFS is not dealing with blocks on the
file, instead it deals with entire files. When a client accesses or opens a file. It is given the entire file. Not just the opening block of the file. Also when a client caches a file,
it caches the entire file. It doesn't cache just
a few blocks of the file. Okay so everything is done on the file level basis
rather than on the block level basis. Also on the client size the cache is
permanent being that it is stored on disk. And so even if the client crashes, it can
then recover and then access its cache. Why is whole file serving
a good alternative? Well you might think that files that are
very large, gigabytes or terabytes large, would involve a lot of overheard. But in fact these design decisions
are based on measurements. Which show up, real file systems that showed that most
file accesses are by a single user. And most files tend to be small. Okay. So this is the common case for
most file accesses and so AFS is catering to this
common case over here. It's making these common
cases really fast. So yes, files that are gigabytes or
terabytes size may become very slow, but those are not the common files anyway. The most common files are small and
accessed by a single user. And those are made really fast by dealing
with entire files rather than blocks. Also even a client cache
as large as a few hundred, hundreds of megabytes
can be stored in RAM. And nowadays, you can stores caches
that are even a few megabytes in RAM. Also finally, file reads are much
more frequent than file writes. And so if you serve entire files, then the reads can be served locally and
the client itself. Rather than going to the server for
blocks. And typically these reads
are also sequential, so storing these files on
disk is fairly efficient. Because now you access consecutive
blocks on this and the client side. A few more details about AFS. The client system is known
as a Venus service, so every client is running a Venus daemon. And the server side it's known as
a Vice service or the Vice daemon. Reads and writes are optimistic,
because whe, whenever a file is opened, the entire file is sent
over to the client side. The read and write can be done in
the local copy of the file at the client machine, at, at Venus. When a file is closed if any writes
were done to the file then those writes are propagated to the vice. Which then updates its copy of the file. When a client opens a file,
the vice, of course, sends the entire file as we've discussed. But it also gives it a call back promise. The call back promise is essentially is
a promise that says that if another client modifies this file and then closes it. Then a call back would be
sent from Vice to this Venus. Okay, so
essentially if a particular client, Venus, has opened a file,
it's given a call back promise. That says that if another client modifies,
opens, modifies and then closes a file. Then this client would be
informed about that modification. Typically the call back state that is
maintained at Venus's is only binary. It says that the state is either valid or
if the call back is actually done, as a result of another client's updates. Then that state is set to be canceled. Which means that essentially this
Venus would then need to go and fetch the file again from device daemon. Okay, so that wraps up our discussion
of distributed file systems. Which are very widely used
today both in data centers and in smaller scale clusters. We've discussed the design of a vanilla
distributed file system as well as two very popular file systems, NFS and AFS. This is only the tip of the iceberg. And there are many other file
systems out there today. Both cutting edge research file
systems also as file systems, that are in use, today. Very widely in clusters and
in data centers. [MUSIC]