[MUSIC] In this next series of lectures, we'll be seeing what distributed
file systems look like. In today's lecture this lecture, we're going to look at what
the file system abstraction is. And we look at a design for
a manila distributed file system. In the next lecture, we'll look at
a couple of real distributed file systems. So, what is a file system? A file system, as many of you know and
have used in your real life. Contains files and it contains directories sometimes,
the directories are known as folders. Essentially files contain data
they might be your, programs, they might be, text,
they might be executable files, and they might be a variety
of other kinds of files. And the directories of course contain,
many files inside of them. Files and directories which are provided
by the file system are given a higher level of abstraction. And this enables users and processes
to think about data stored in files and directories rather than forcing users and processes to think about disk blocks
where files and directories are stored. That would be very uncomfortable, right? If you were thinking of whereas what
are the disc blocks on my particular programming assignment or
my particular videos are stored. That would be kind of an uncomfortable
lower level of abstraction. Here the file system provides you
a higher level of abstraction so that you are able to think about,
user centric aspects and processes are also able to think about files rather
than dealing with low level details. So a typical file may consist
of the following components, it consists of a header and
then it consists of the blocks. Typically the blocks are of the same size
because the file system imposes a maximum size on the block or
the block size might be a few megabytes. That's typical but of course it
varies from file system to another. Those blocks, block 0 through
block N minus one shown over here, contain the actual data for
the file itself. So if you have a text file, then, you know, your actual text would
be contained in these blocks. The header in turn, contains a lot
of meta information about the file. For instance, it may contain time stamps when was the time when this file was
created, that's a creation timestamp. That would include the date and
the time at which the file was created. When was the fa, file last read? So whenever the file is read by any
process, the read timestamp is updated. When was the file last written is
maintained in the write timestamp similarly and
finally when was the header last updated. If the header was last updated,
at some time, then that time time and date is written in the header timestamp. Now of course, these are only samples
there might be other kinds of stamps, in the actual file systems themselves. Next, the header contains
what kind of a file this is. So it may contain information about,
you know, whether this is a program file. Like a .c or .java or whether it's
a text file a .text or a .doc or whether it's an executable file like
a .exe or even an object file like .o. This is useful for processes that are opening the file
to know what kind of a file it is. Next you have ownership, who is the actual
owner of this file, which is the user. Or who, which is the u, what is the user ID of the user who
actually owns this file right now? The owner may not be the only one who can
access this file there might be other users who are allowed to access
the file in different modes. Some users might be allowed to write the
file other users may be allow, allowed to only read but not write the file and that
is maintained in the access control list. The access control list
maintains a list of, all the users were allowed
to access the file. And for each user,
it maintain information about which modes this user is allowed to
access this file in. Is it a read only mode? Is it a read drive mode? Is it a write only mode? Or is it executed mode, or something else? Finally, you contain the, you have
the reference count of the header. This is a important integer that
is maintained in the header. The reference count refers to how
many directories contain in this particular file. By default when you create a file
inside a directory the reference count is set to one. This means that this file is
contained in one directory. However, you could hard link the same
file from other directories, and this would increment the reference count. And when you delete a file
the reference count goes down by one. You see this when we discuss the API soon. But essentially, when the reference count
reaches zero, you can delete the file. Okay, but by default,
the reference count as one and it's incremented whenever
you hard link the file. So what about directories? We have discussed files so far but directories are just treated
like files by the file system. Instead of containing data, however,
the directories contain information about the file that are there
in the directories. The directories don't actually contain
the files themselves that are inside them, instead they contain pointers,
on disc for instance to the files. So that when you list the directory,
it gives you the names and meta information about the files but also from the directory itself you can
access those files on disc itself. This is where most of our discussion
will be focusing only on files because directories are only
a special case of files. So let's discuss what happens in the Unix
file system, which is one of the most, one of the more classical file systems and a lot of today's file systems
are based off of the Unix file system. Unix file system uses
a notion of file descriptors. A file descriptor is essentially a handle
for a process, to access that is read or write a file. Each process needs to open the file and obtain a file descriptor before
it executes any operations on it. And then after it is done
executing the operations, it needs to close the file descriptor. Whenever a file is opened by a process the
operating system creates an internal data structure, for that file descriptor. So it creates a new file descriptor,
creates an internal data structure and then returns a handle to the process. Then the handle can be used by the process
for subsequent read and write operations. So for instance,
in a typical Unix system or Unix like system, the process might call
open to open a given file that already exists in the system with the file
name and in a particular mode. The mode might specify that it's
a read mode or it's a write mode or it's a read write mode,
both are allowed too. Or it's an executable mode, or
some combination of these three. This call goes to the operating system,
which is running the file system, and then operating system returns
a handle which is a file descriptor. Typically, the file descriptor is
just an integer, which when passed, to the file system itself or an operating system tells it what it is
the internal data structure to access. If the file doesn't exist in the system
then you call create, on the file itself and that will again return the file
descriptor after creating the file. Then you can do your read and writes and
finally when you're done, when the process is done, with all its operations on the
file it can close in the file descriptor. This does not delete the file this
only closes that file descriptor and says to the operating system or
to the file system, that this particular process is done with
its operations on this file for now. So essentially, the open or create opens a
session where the process reads a file and the close closes that session for
reading and writing the file. So how do you read and write the file? Well once you have the file descriptor
after you've called open or create, you can use the file descriptor
as the argument in your recalls. So process, once it is opened the file
may call read on the file descriptor with an internal buffer specified and
the number of bytes that it wants to read. Well, this call doesn't really specify
where in the file you start reading from. All that is done by maintaining a retry
pointer as part of the file descriptor. So the file descriptor which is maintained
inter, internally inside the file system maintains a retry pointer which is
pointing to an offset within the file. Typically the offset, well the offset
is initially zero by default but when you call a read with num_bytes
set to some value, say ten, right? The read will start reading from
the beginning of the file, the beginning because the read write pointer
points to the beginning of the file. And then returns the you know, it returns the first ten bytes because
num_bytes is ten into the buffer. The internal buffer of the process. But then, after the read is done
the read-write pointer is automatically advanced by num_bytes bytes. So, the read-write pointer now
points to the 11th byte in the file. A subsequent read done to the same file descriptor will
start from the 11th byte, onwards. Okay, so there's an implicit read-write
pointer involved here so that processes do not need to deal with explicitly saying
where in the file they want to read from. The same thing is true for writes as well. When you call write on a file
descriptor with a buffer that says what you want to write in the file and the number of bytes that says how
many bytes you want to write. Again, the write starts from
the read write pointer that is currently pointing to
some offset in the file. After the write is done, the read-write
point is advanced by num bytes, bytes. Now this is,
the read-write pointer is kind of a median because the processes do not
know, need, need to deal with eh, explicitly saying where you are in the
file, but sometimes you may need to do so. You may need to actually locate
your file descriptor read-write pointer in a file and
that's where lseek comes into play. With lseek you can take
a file descriptor and you can say that you wanted to point
to a particular offset within a file. So this resets the read-write pointer
to that offset within a file. This offset may be an absolute offset. You may say ten here and
say absolute here for whence. In which case, the read-write pointer
will point to the tenth byte of the file. Or you may say the offset is a ten and
whence is relative, in which case, the read-write pointer is advanced
by ten compared to where it is now. So that's a relative,
advancement or a relative lseek. A couple, a few more operations that
are useful, these are control operations. Link, unlink, and stat. So remember we, I mentioned, hard linking
in the beginning of this lecture. Well, here is where linking and
unlinking can be done. So you can link, a file, that is at an old link, to a new link
by specifying these as parameters. This does not remove
the file from the old link. Instead, it creates a new link
that also points to the file. Okay? So creates a new link
at the second argument, pointing the file at the first argument. It does not duplicate the file, it just creates a new pointer
inside the file system. Now, essentially, you'll have, after
this link, returns, you're going to have two different directories, pointing to
the same file that is located on disk. And in this case you know, these old link
and new link are unique style names and so the directories actually
point to those files. Whenever you call link,
this is hard linking here, it increments a reference
point to the file, because the reference count p, refers to
how many directories contain the file. This is known as hard linking, and there's
a different kind of linking known as soft linking or symbolic linking,
which does not affect reference counts. When you soft link or symbolic link a file, essentially
you're creating a separate file that contains a pointer inside of the file
to the file that you're linking to. When you delete the original
file the symbolic file stays on, in an effort to junk on the file system,
but it stays on because it does not
affect the reference count itself. When you want to unlink a file,
remove it from a directory, you call unlink on the, on the link and
this decrements the reference count. So if you link the file, originally and
its reference count is two, you can now unlink it from, one of the old links and
the reference count will go down to one. The file will not be deleted. The file will still stay around
with a reference count of one, with the directory, with one of
the directories pointing to it. When you unlink the second, the file from
the second directory that it, you know, that it was contained in, then
the reference count goes down to zero and now the file can be deleted. Finally you can use these
functions known as stat and fstat on the file name to get information,
from the header such as the timestamps and the reference counts, into the buffer,
in the process itself. Now these API functions that I've
discussed are only the tip of the iceberg. Unix supports a variety of other APIs and,
API functions. And, if you're interested in
them you should look them up. So what about distributed file systems? So far we have discussed
a case where the client, process that is accessed in
the file system is located, is using the same operating
system as the file system itself. And the file system was
running inside the OS. What happens when you have clients
starting on different machines that are different OSs than the server
which is running on a different OS. When the files are stored on a server
machine in these cases, the client machine or the client process rather does RPCs,
or remote procedure calls to the server machine or the server process in order
to perform operations on the file. We'll see this played out in more
detail over the next few slides but what do we desire from
distributed file system? Well, we desire a few properties. First, we desire transparency. Transparency essentially says that
client process should be able to access DFS files
the distributive system files, as if they were indistinguishable
from local say, UNIX, files. So, accessing a distributed
file located in a DFS, should be no different from
accessing the local file. In other words,
the API should be the same. In other words, the code that the client
uses to access the local file should be the same as the code that
the client uses to access the remote file. Also, the distributed file system may
be changing the location of the file. For instance if the server is changed,
it may be replicating the file for fault tolerance, maybe storing multiple
copies of the file on different servers. And all of this should be
invisible to the client. The client processes should not need to
be able to know about where the file is located, whether or not the file is
replicated in order to access the file and do reads and writes on it. Next, you want to support
concurrent clients. So, the whole one of the bigger reasons to
have a distributed file system is to be, is to allow multiple clients to
concurrently or simultaneously read and write, a file. Okay, and so you want a DFS to
support concurrent clients. And finally, you want to have
replication for fault tolerance. You may want to replicate the file or
certain blocks of the file across different servers so that if some
servers fail, you don't lose the file. You still have at least one
copy of the file around. So when you have replication or
concurrent accesses, once again there's a couple of
semantics that you need to worry about. The first is one-copy update semantics. This essentially says that when a file is
replicated, its contents, as visible to clients, are no different from when
the file has exactly one replica. Okay, so essentially this is saying
that even though the file is replicated, as far as the client operations
are concerned, the end result is the same as if the file had exactly one copy and
was not replicated at all. Since you have RPCs going on between
the client and each of the clients and the server you need to choose
the semantics of your RPCs. You remember from our, discussion of RPCs earlier in the course
that RPCs may have semantics. At most once operation,
at least once operation, semantics were the two common,
cases that we discussed. You need to choose which of these, you
use for your file system very carefully. If you choose at most once for
a particular operation, you need to make sure,
that those operations are not repeated. For instance append operation
are okay with at most once because then those are not repeated. You don't want to repeat
appending the same, piece of information to
your file multiple times. However some operations can be repeated
multiple times without any side effects even though they
are repeated multiple times. These are known as idempotent operations. For instance,
reading a file at an absolute position or an absolute offset within the file
is an idempotent operation. And no matter whether you do it
one time or a million times, you're going to return the same result
as long as the file doesn't change. So operations that are idempotent can
be used with at least once semantics. Next you would need to
worry about security. When you have a distributed file system, your messages are going to
cross over the network and this means that attackers might be able
to intercept and modify your messages. And so you need to make sure that
two properties are satisfied. They are authentication and authorization. Authentication essentially says that
the use of the server is convinced that, the client process. Is acting on behalf of the user that in
fact, it is claiming to act on behalf of. Okay, so this actually, essentially
authenticates the client process. After a user is authenticated or
after a client process is authenticated, you need to verify that that user or
that client process is actually allowed to access the file and perform
operations in a legal manner, okay? You know, if it's trying,
if the process is trying to read the file, then the process should actually
be authorized to read that file. In fact, it should be present in
the access control lists of that file. If it is trying to write the file, then it should actually have
permission to write the file. So how do you maintain these permissions? Well, there's two popular flavors for
maintaining these permissions, they are ACLs or access control lists and
capability lists. One is the inverse of the other. Access control lists maintained
on a per file basis. The list of allowed
users who are accessed, who are allowed to access that file. And for each user, what more it is
allowed to access that file in. For Unix-like DFSs, distributed file
systems, that typically the mode is read, write, execute, or
some combination thereof, but for other distributed file systems, you could
have other access modes allowed as well. But essentially, access control lists
are per-file lists of users and allowed access modes. Capability lists is the inverse,
which is a per-user list. And on-a-per-user basis,
it specifies the list of files, and directories if necessary, that that
particular user is allowed to access. And for each of those files, what mode or what modes that user is
allowed to access those files in. Now, capability lists are often
split up into capabilities. Each capability would specify,
for instance, for a pair of user comma file whether that
user is allowed to access that file, and what mode it is allowed to access it in. If there is not a capability for
a particular user file pair, then essentially that user is not
allowed any access to that file. Okay, so now, you know what access
control lists mean or what ACLs mean and what capabilities mean. These are fairly commonly used terms in
distributed file systems and, in general, whenever security is being talked
off in distributed systems. Next, let's build our let's build
our distributed file system. We'll call it our Vanilla distributed
file system or Vanilla DFS. The Vanilla DFS runs on a server,
and it also run at multiple clients. It consists of three types of processes. Two of them running at the server,
one running on the client. On the server, you run the flat file
service and the directory service. The directory service uses
the flat file service. In other words, it's a client of the flat
file service even though it's running on the server machine. And the client service runs
at each of the clients, and it talks to the directory service and
the flat file service. Essentially, the flat file service
stores files without worrying about the hierarchical structure. You know, the Unix files, and
also, Windows files, Mac files. All these file systems have
a hierarchical structure for their files. The flat file service does not
worry about hierarchical structure. It simply takes the file ids into account. The hierarchical structure is put
into the directory service itself. So, let's look at what the flat
file service's API look like. So, you can read a file
by providing the file_id. This is the unique id of the file, specify
a buffer into which you want to read. You want, you can specify the position
in the file from which you want to read. This is the actual,
absolute position in the file, and you want to specify the number
of bytes that you want to read. So this reads num_bytes from
the absolute position in the file. Which has a file id, file_id into
the buffer in the processes address space. Now, a few things to note here. File_ id is not a file descriptor. There's no notion of file descriptors
in our Vanilla DFS, okay? The file id is a unique id of that file. It's not a file name. It's a unique id, and you obtain that id
by using the file name from the directory service, as you'll see soon. The other thing to notice
is that we are actually, we are using an absolute
position in the file. We are not using an automatic
read-write pointer. Why not?
Well, because you are using RPCs here. You want to support at
least one's semantics, and you want this operation to be idempotent. You don't want t his operation to
be repeated multiple times and cause side effects. If you are using a an automatic
read-write pointer then, at least once, semantics would just not sit well
with this particular with, with the, with the distributed file system. And so, you don't want to use
automatic read-write pointers. You want the operation to be
repeatable without any side effects. And that's why you want to do a read at a,
at an absolute position. So, this operation,
the read operation that I specified here, that are on the slide,
can be repeated multiple times. And, it will result in the same,
end effects, without causing any extra side effects. Second, we don't use file descriptors. Why not?
Well, essentially, we want the servers to be stateless. We don't want to maintain any
information on the server side. Including any data structures
like file descriptors because the server might crash. If the server crashes, we don't want to lose any data and
leave the server in an inconsistent state. We want the server to be able to
recover from where it left off without using any state from
the previous incarnation. Okay so, keeping the server stateless
makes it easier to recover the server after failures because there
is no state to restore. So, in contrast, as we have discussed,
the Unix single machine operating system, file system is neither idempotent nor
is it, stateless. Right?
So done similarly from an absolute position to
an absolute position in a file. We have the same semantics as a read. You can also create or delete a, a file
with a given file_id, and you can get or set the attributes of that
file_id using a buffer. What about a directory service? A directory services allows
you to obtain a file_id for a given file,
in a given directory using the file_name. This directory would be the slash
dir meta hierarchical name of that directory within
which that file is located. Then, after you locate this file_id, you
can then use this file_id in the flat file service that we already discussed to
then execute operations on the file. You can also add a name to a particular, a directory with a given file_name and
this increments a reference count. You can also un _name a particular
file_name in a given directory, this decrements a reference count. If it reaches zero, then,
the server can then delete that file. For a given directory, you can also, get the list of all
files that match a given pattern. And this is kind of like ls,
minus al or dir in Windows followed by a grep in Unix or
a find in Windows. Okay, so, that's our Vanilla
distributed file system. In the next lecture,
we're going to see the design of two very popular distributed file
systems that continue to be used today. They are NFS and AFS. [MUSIC].