[MUSIC] Hi there.
In this lecture, we're going to discuss this concept
known as Distributed Shared Memory. So far, in the course whenever we resume
that processes communicate with each other over a distributed system. We assume that they use a network. This is a message passing network
where a process sends a message and none of the processors receives a message. But what if we allowed processes instead
to share memory pages with each other where processes,
might be able to write and read pages. So if a process wrote to a page number
five and another process read from a page number five this would make it much
more easier to write programs. We could then take programs
they were written for a regular multiprocessor operating systems
and then just run them over a distributed system, where you a have
a network underneath. So you might be able to
reuse the programs as well. So this is the concept that is
known as distributed shared memory, where you have processes sharing
pages with each other but in fact they are doing this over a, a message
passing network that is underneath. So processes virtually share
pages with each other but underneath, they're, the underlying
distributed shared memory system is implementing this by using
the message passing. So that's the main challenge over here. So distributed shared memory, in fact,
is trying to, achieve in software, what has already been achieved in hardware
in the multiprocessor operating systems. So multiprocessor operating systems
you have multiple processors sharing a common bust,
sharing a common memory and they already communicate with each
other and they share the memory, right? So they share the pages of the memory. Well you want to implement the same thing
in software over a distributed system, so it's the software version of
multiprocessor communication, but, over the network, okay? So that's a main challenge over here. In fact, distributed shared memory and message passing are equivalent to
each other in the sense that, given a distributed shared memory system you
can implement the message passing system. You, you, you do this by sharing a common
page as a buffer where you read and write messages, essentially you use
it as a producer consumer buffer. You can also do the reverse, where you
can implement the switch head memory over a message passing network and we
will see how to do that in, this lecture. So in order to do that, you need to
maintain at each process a cache, a cache stores some pages, that were
recently accessed by that process. When a process wants to read or
write a memory address in a page. It first checks if that page
is present in the cache. If it is present then,
it uses that version of the cache. If it's not, then it, then it may need to fetch, that
page from somewhere else in the system. And so, essentially a cache
is a collection of pages that have been recently accessed by the process
that owns that particular cache. So you notice in this figure that
every process has its own local cache. Typically this cache is of course
located on the same machine and on the same memory, and
the same operating system as that process. Now pages are typically mapped to
the local memory of that process, the cache is mapped to the local memory. As well when a page is present in
memory it is called a page hit, so when the process tries
to access a page and it is already present in
memory it is a page hit. However, if the page is not present
in memory it's called a page miss and this leads to a page fault. A page fault happens in regular paging
systems that are implemented by operating systems as well and typically in a regular
paging system and operating system. When a page fault occurs,
operating system goes and fetches a particular block from
the disk and stores it in main memory. In a distributed shared memory system,
however the page fault handler, the kernel trap handler that
is involved in the page fault runs the distribute software,
distribute, shared memory software. Which then might fetch the page
from a different process elsewhere on the network, 'kay? And it typically does
this by using multicast. So we are replacing some portion of the
kernel, in there with our DSM software. So essentially distributed shared memory
can be implemented in any system that that in, that, that involves paging. By replacing the page fault handler and a few pieces of software in
there with appropriate software. So a few terms before we
describe several scenarios, the owner is that special process that has
the latest version of a particular page. So every page has an owner
process at an incremental point of time that process owns
the latest version of the page. The owner of the page might
change from time to time as you will see as we go along. Second, each page is either in
the read state or the write state. We know this as the R state or
W state respectively. When a page is in the R state,
the owner has a read copy but other processes might also
have link copies, 'kay? So this means that multiple processes
are allowed to read a given page simultaneously. However, no, right copies exist of that
page when any right copy exists, when any page, when a given page is in the W
state, only owner has a copy of the page. No other copy of the page exists at
any other processes in the group. This means that essentially
rights are exclusive but reads can be shared with other processes. Of course here,
when I'm saying an owner has a copy. I mean that the owner has a copy
of the page in its own cache. When I say, a process has a copy,
I essentially, meaning that the process has a copy
of that page in its own cache. So, let's discuss a few
scenarios that might occur when a process is trying to do a read. Here, in all these scenarios,
process 1 is attempting a read and there are six scenarios
I'm going to discuss here. In this first scenario,
the process 1 is the owner of the page and has a page already in the R state. In this case, the read is served
directly from the cache of process 1 and no messages need to be sent out over
the network, so that's the first scenario. Let's look at the second scenario, in the
second scenario the process 1 is the owner of the page and
the page is in the write RW state. Once again, in this case, a read by
process 1 can be directly from the cache and it does not need,
any messages to be sent over the network. And the third scenario, the process one is
the owner has a page in the read state but there are bunch of other processes that
also have the same page in the read state. In this case, processes three and four
are in the read state for that given page. Once again, process one, when it reads
the page, the read can be served from the cache and no messages need to be
sent The fourth scenario is where, it's similar to the third scenario
except that someone else is the owner. And once again here the read can be
served from the cache at process one, and no messages need to be sent. Now let's get to the other scenarios
which need, something else to happen. So in the fifth scenario here, process 1
does not have the page in its own cache other processes have
the page in the R state. So in this case, processes 3 and
4 have the page in the R state. In this case, process 1 asks for
a copy of the page for this it uses multicast inside
the group of DSM processes here. When it sends out a multicast message
asking for this particular page, say page number five then the owner responds
back wit, the latest version of the page. And, then a process 1, marks the pages R, as in read state and then it can do
the read directly from the cache itself. So the end state in this particular case
would look like this where process one refreshed the page and then mark it as
R and then do the read from itself. Let's get to the sixth and the final
scenario, where process one is trying to read the page and there is a right
copy of the page located elsewhere, in this case process 4 which is also
of course the owner of that page. In this case, process 1 needs to ask
the other process to degrade its copy to the to the R or to the lead mode. It locates this process via multicast, so essentially it sends out a multicast
to the group and the other process that is the owner responds back to
the multicast saying hey I am the owner. So process 1 fetches a page,
marks it as R, and then it does a read. In the meantime, process 4 also
degrades its copy from a W to an R. So the end state in this case looks like
this where process four has changed its, copy from W to an R. It still retains copy of the page so
that it can continue to read it and process 1 also has a read copy of
the page so it can continue read it. Process 4, if it wanted to write
the page again it would then need to do something as it cannot write
this page as is in this particular state. So let's discuss what happens with writes. So here is one scenario for a write,
process 1 is trying to write a given page and it is the owner of the page and
it has a, a write copy of the page. In this case the write can be
done directly to the cache and normally just need to be
sent out over the network. Second scenario, process 1 is the,
owner of the page it has, the page in the read state and the other processes,
the have the page in the read state. In this case, process 1 needs to ask
the other processes to invalidate their copies of the page, 'kay? So it does this by using multicast it
sends out a multicast message saying hey please invalidate all your copies
of the page, I want to do it right. Once this is done, it marks its own copy
as W, meaning it can be now written and that it does it right,
in this particular state. So in this case you notice that page
three, processes 3 and 4 have invalidates all their copies of the page so they can
no longer use that copy of the page. If they want to do any operations on
that particular page they need to fetch a new copy from the new owner. In the meantime, process 1 now has a write
copy of the page and it can go ahead and do both reads as well
as writes on this copy. That's the second scenario for the write. Let's discuss the third scenario. In this case,
someone else is the owner, and the process 1 has a page
in the read state. Once again, this is similar to
the previous case except that, the process 1 now addition now
needs to become the owner. So the other processes are asked to
invalidate their copies of the page they do so, processes 3 and 4 do so,
here in this particular figure. And process 1 gets, the ownership of the
page as well as marks the page as W and then doesn't write on that page. And here's the fourth scenario,
process 1 does not have the page at all. Other processes have the page in either
the read state or the R state or, or the, or the W state. In this case, I just showed the R state
but it doesn't really matter the, the operations similar if other processes
have it in the write state as well. Essentially process 1 asks other processes
to invalidate their copies of the page, again it uses multicast for
this, it fetches all copies, it uses the latest copy or it can just
fetch the copy directly from the owner. It marks its copy as W and
it becomes the owner. Other processes, 3 and 4 this case
invalidate their copies of the page so they can't use that copy anymore. We need to fetch,
a copy from the latest owner. So even though the slide here says fetch
all copies you really don't need to fetch all copies. You just need to ask,
send out a multicast and have only the owner respond back to you
with the latest version of the page. So that is known as the invalidate
approach, where when you do a write and other processes have a copy of the page, you ask them to invalidate
their copies of the page. The invalidate,
approach works well in many of the cases. However, there are some cases where,
you might have bad behavior, in the invalidate approach. If ytwo processes write the same page
concurrently, for instance, if they are writing different variables that
happen to reside on the same page then there's a flip flopping behavior where
one process invalidates the other and then soon after the second process
invalidates the first one. And this involves loss of network transfer
because essentially on every invalidate you fetch the new copy of the page over,
to, another process. Okay, so this is what is known as false
sharing when unrelated variables fall on the same page and
this results in flip-flopping behaviour, in the invalidate approach to
distributed shared memory. Essentially what's happening here is that
the false sharing happens when the page size is so large that it, it captures
more than the locality of interest. Every processor has a locality of interest
which is typically the window within which it is accessing variables and changing variables, the page size needs to
be just about the locality of interest. But this of course is hard to know because
the locality of interest depends on the application,
it depends on the processes themselves and of course it can vary over time. In general, you want your page size to
capture the locality of interest, if the page size is much larger you can have
false sharing where different processes. Have variables on the same page and results in this flip-flopping
behavior that we just discussed. If the page size is too small then,
you know? Your capturing only a small portion
of the locality of interest and you end up incurring too
many page transfers. The pay, there are way too many pages in
the system and so you incur a very high overhead in transferring these pages and
this also is very inefficient. So setting the page size is an important
concern in distributed share systems you want it set not too high but
not too low either. An alternative approach to the invalidate
approach is what is the update approach. In this approach,
multiple processes are allowed to have the page in the right state so
unlike in the invalidate approach where. At most one process could have
a given page in the right state, here multiple processes are allowed to
have a given page in the right state. When a process writes to a page it does
not invalidate the other processes, instead it sends them multicast saying
hey, I have written byte, the bytes at address so and so with these values,
please update your copies of the page. 'Kay, so that's why this is
known as the update approach. On a write,
you send update messages to the other processes that are currently
holding write copies on this page. So in this way the other processes
can then continue reading and writing this particular page. Update the update approach here is
preferable over invalidate under some situations only, when there's
a lot of sharing among processes. When writes happen to very small variables
and when page sizes are very large. But in general though, the invalidate
approach is the more preferable approach because it tends to work
well in more of the cases, more of the realistic cases
than the update approach. Consistency, whenever you have multiple
processes sharing data such as pages, consistency comes into the picture. We have discussed consistency before. We have discussed several consistency
models when we discussed key value stores, and no sequential store systems and
those key, those same consistency
models apply here as well. Those include linearizability and sequential consistency,
very strong models. Causal consistency, FIFO consistency,
which otherwide is known as, otherwise is known as pipelined RAM
consistency and also eventual consistency. There are also other models such
as release consistency that originated from the structured memory and
the multiprocessor architecture areas. And these should be familiar to you from,
earlier in the course. In fact, all of these terms that you see
here originated from the area of hardware architecture and multiprocessor, architecture,
as well as distributed shared memory. And then later they were
adapted by key value stores and those sequence stored systems,
because after all it's the same concept there where processes share,
certain, memory. So as one goes on the order as you know,
the speed of the system increases, speed of reads or writes increases, but of course the consistency gets weaker and
weaker. So distributed share memory has been
a pretty popular area for a while. It was popular up until about a decade ago
and then it started falling in popularity. But, some have surmised that it
may be making a comeback now with faster networks like Infiniband and
other faster networks. As well as with, solid state drives and other newer versions of solid state
drives coming into the picture. Remote direct memory access also
known as RDMA where one, machine or a processor on one machine accesses the
RAM of another machine, over the network. That is becoming, more and more widespread
now it's becoming more realistic now. And only time will tell whether DSM or
distributed share memory will make a comeback, and become,
more widespread in today's machines. As of now,
it's not really very widely used today. So this is distributed shared memory
where processes share pages instead of sending and receiving message is
a useful abstraction to write code. Where if you've written code for
processes that you know, share the same memory over one
operating system, you know, you can simply take the same code and run
it over distributed shared memory system. Where these processes are instead
different machines communicating over a network. So distributed shared memory essentially
provides a virtual abstraction of process sharing pages while underneath, it
is running over a message passing network. There's a distributed shared memory can
be implemented over a message passing interface and also vice-versa. So, these two forms of communication
are in fact equivalent. And we've discussed two
different flavors of of implementing distributed shared
memory they're known as invalidate. Which is a more popular approach and update which is a less popular approach
but it's an alternative, available to you. [MUSIC]