[MUSIC] In this lecture we're going to study
the outage that happened at Facebook a few years ago. So this outage happened on 23rd September, 2010, and during this outage Facebook was
unreachable for two and a half hours. This was the worst outage in the past four
years leading up to then at Facebook. Facebook published a post-mortem
after the outage was resolved and all the information your seeing
on this particular lecture is from that post-mortem. Once again our goal in studying
this outage is not to say that Facebook is a bad infrastructure in
fact it is a very robust infrastructure. And doing the outage Facebook was very
open and honest with its users about what was going on and after the outage
Facebook improved the infrastructure and continues to improve its
infrastructure to avoid such outages. As you know Facebook at, is to be one of the market leaders
in the area of social networks. So a little bit of background before
we discuss the actual outage itself. In Facebook, data is stored in
a persistent store as well as in a cache. Okay?
So the persistent store has many servers that are essentially
back-end servers storing the data. And the data includes, you know,
things like Facebook profiles updates. The status updates that you post. The frame information photographs,
and so on and so forth. The cache is another set of servers
that is closer to the clients that is running
a distributed cache system. So the cache server sit in between the
persistent store servers in the one end, and the actual client machines,
the user machines your browser or your mobile device on the other end. This system that includes
a person in store in cache includes configuration data. And Facebook has an automated system for verifying the configuration
values in the cache servers. Whenever a particular
configuration value is invalid the cache server replaces it with updated
correct values that it fetches from the store from the person
on the store service. So on September 23rd, Facebook made a change to the persistent
copy of a particular configuration. Unfortunately, that particular change was
invalid, because this is where the human operator mistake comes into play that
triggers this particular outage. When this change, invalid change was made,
all the clients when I say clients here, I mean Facebook cache servers,
not your mobile device and your browser. What so, for this you know,
when I say clients, where this other units say clients,
I mean Facebook cache servers. When these the client, these Facebook,
Facebook cache servers, saw this invalid value, all of them
attended, attended to fix it all at once. All of them queried this cluster
databases the persistent store to fetch the updated value, and the
databases were quickly overrun by these hundreds of thousands of queries per
second coming from these cache servers. Pretty quickly, the team discovered this
and fixed the invalid configuration, and at this point you might
start to think well, okay, so now the outage is starting to recover or
should start to recover. But as we've seen before with outages, they keep cascading because of other
factors that come into play as well. When a client, meaning the Facebook cache
server receive an error from a database, it interpreted this as invalid and
deleted the corresponding cache entry. So essentially when a database failed to
respond, the client created even more requests to send to the to the database
layer, to the persistent storage layer. So you can see this bad cascading loop
happening where the database has an error, the cache service see this error. They try to fetch information from the
database, but because the database network is overwhelmed by these hundreds
of thousand of waves per second. The cache server times out and
panics and it tries to query the database even more aggressively,
or at least as aggressively as before. And this keeps the network always in
a bad state and stuck in this bad state. In other words, there is no backup. The cache servers did not slow down
sending the rate of queries when they saw congestion in the,
the line from the database itself. Okay, so this rinse-n-repeat cycle
lead to the cascading failures and the outage kept propagating and
continuing in this particular case. Facebook solution eventually
was to realize that they had to turn off
the entire Facebook website. This stopped all the traffic
to the database cluster, and the database started to recover. This slowly allowed users back on. This also meant slowly allowing
the cache servers to come online. And the cache servers slowly
started to update their caches. This kept the traffic to the database,
the persistent store layer pretty low. But you know, allowing these cache
servers on in in stages took awhile and it took until later in the day for
the entire site to be back up. So what lesson is to be learned from this
particular outage case study, right? First of all a new configuration
system design is what Facebook built after this outage, and to avoid exactly
outages of this kind the second was that, when you cannot access a resource. In this case, the caches unable
to access the database copy of a configuration value. You should not try aggressively to
try to access the resource again. Okay, don't try as hard or harder to try to access that
resource instead backoff which means that wait longer than you waited the last
time to try to access the resource. So each time a request fails,
you wait twice as long as last time. That's a potential solution. This is often known as
exponential backoff. Such an approach is used in networking
protocols like 802.11 as well as in transport layer protocols
like TCP to avoid congestion. A similar approach may be
needed when it comes to data centered layer in terms
of avoiding such outages. [MUSIC]