[MUSIC] In this next series of lectures we're
going to be seeing a set of case studies that look at particular datacenter outages
that happened over the last several years. And also the causes for these outages. So, just to start with, here's a simple
quiz question for you to think about. This is not an automated quiz, but
something for you to think about. Here are some possibly common
causes of datacenter outages. When I say datacenter outage, I mean
something like, Facebook goes offline for several hours, or Amazon web services
goes offline for several days, or you know, some website goes offline for
for a significant period of time. When such an outage happens, clearly something might be
happening at a data center. Why do you think a data
center might go out? One cause might be power outage. Maybe they forgot to pay their bills. The second cause might be over-heating. Maybe some of the servers
are working too hard and they caused too much of a temperature rise, and
that caused the data center to shut down. The third cause may be human error,
maybe someone committed a mistake. Fire is of course something that
always could take datacenter down, and finally you can have
denial of service attacks, which are explicit malicious attacks
by humans or bots on datacenters. Which of these do you think
is the most frequent? So take a pick and
know the answer is human error. In fact, it turns out that 70% of
datacenter outages are caused, at least the initial cause
is because of human error. Human error is not the only factor
that comes into play, though. Power outage, over-heating, fire, and a,
and a host of other reasons also come into play, but typically,
the outage is triggered by human error. But there are always other factors
that keep the outage going, as you will see as we go along. To give you an example of human error
being responsible for outages, here are some examples that I've taken from
a website called availabilitydigest.com. One example was that a system operator
mistakenly deleted the $38 billion Alaska Permanent Fund database,
and then also deleted its backup. This res, this resulted in the entire
database being gone, all right? So this is clearly human error. The second example was when
a maintenance contractor's mistake shut down
the Oakland Air Traffic Control Center. A third example was a State of Virginia
technician pulled the wrong controller, and crashed a redundant SAN, storage area network that had already
suffered a controller failure. And so this is the example of an outage
that started with a human error, that was triggered by human error. But there were other cascading effects,
such as an already existing controller failure that caused
the outage to become worse. In my earlier other example
was a technician with the DBS Bank made an unauthorized
repair on a redundant, on a redundant storage unit network and
took down both sides. There are many more
examples on this website. And here are some more. The, I don't want to go
through all of these. I just want to point out one of them. You can pause the video at this point and
read the examples. But one of them that is really useful here
is this one highlighted in orange font. Siren noise damaged several disks,
including the virtual backup disks. It's somewhat less well-known that
noise affects the performance of disks. There are some videos on YouTube
that you can find that show this. But essentially because hard disks
involve the precise movements by the head of the hard disk over the platter,
the magnetic platter noise can affect these precision these precise movements,
and can affect the performance and the bandwidth, the throughput
of these hard disks as well. They can also cause hard disks to crash or
rather the heads to crash and then the hard disk may
result in lost data. So there are many more
examples such as this and what we want to be doing is picking a few
of these examples of major outages, and studying them in detail, 'kay? So why do we want to study
these outages at all? Well the first reason is because
they're sort of fun to study. Schadenfreude is an English word,
originally from German, that says that we take pleasure in the misery of others
that's not really our goal here. Our main goal here is to learn lessons, to study these outages as
evidence of what could go wrong. And to draw conclusions about
how we can avoid such outages. 'Kay, in general we want to be able
to learn about the actual behavior of systems in the real world, in the wild. You know,
after this course you might write code for maybe even cloud computing systems. Your code is going around on servers and
datacenters. And it's better for you to know what might go wrong with
these datacenter requirements, so that you can prepare ahead of time
in terms of how your service runs. Okay, so this will hopefully help us
design better systems in the future. Once again, the goal of this series
of lectures is not to say that some companies are worse than others. It is not to point fingers. Everyone suffers outages. As we know in this course, failures
are the norm rather than the exception. In fact, it turns out that
the examples that we'll see for the most part are companies, and
that responded very well to outages. When the outages, the inevitable outages
did happen, the companies were very transparent and very open and very
honest with their customers and users. And in fact after the outages
were were resolved, and the companies wrote postmortem
reports that analyzed the outage and in fact all the information you see here
is open information that is available on the web from these postmortem reports. 'Kay, so this goes along with the adage
what doesn't kill you makes you stronger. Okay, so we'll see a few
case studies of outages, and then we'll learn lessons from them. [MUSIC]