[MUSIC] In this lecture we're going to
study a particular outage that happened at the Amazon Web Services,
the AWS service. So this outage occurred April 21st,
2011 and all the data and all the information we are going to see
in this lecture are from a post mortem analysis that AWS published
after this outage as a result. Once again, our goal in this class in
this outage is not to say that AWS is is a bad infrastructure, in fact,
it's quite the opposite. AWS is very open and honest and
transparent with its customers and users, and they kept giving continuous
updates during the outage and after that outage, AWS improved its
infrastructure to avoid outages like this. And as you know, AWS continues to be one of the market
leaders in the cloud computing area. During this outage several
companies using AWS especially the EC2 service
Elastic Compute Cloud went down. This included companies like Reddit and
FourSquare. AWS dashboard showed problems with the EC2
service and also other storage services as you'll see in the EBS service was the one
that was the root cause of this outage. The overall outage lasted at least three
and a half days, and there was also long tail of recovery and some permanent
data loss for some of the customers. So a little bit of background before
we discuss the actual outage itself AWS is split into regions. You can think of these regions
as being separate datacenters. For instance, there's a us-east-1 region, there's a separate region called
us-west-1, and so on and so forth. Typically, you know customers who are
running a service for their users want to run their service in a region that
is close to some of their customers. So if you have servers that are running
on the east coast you might want to, want to host it on the us-east-1 region. Each region itself is divided
into multiple availability zones. The best way to think about
the availability zones is like they are different racks within
the same datacenter. 'Kay, so you can have automatic rep,
data replication across availability zones within a region, but this has to
be explicitly done by the customers and not all customers choose to do it. And the outage here that we see affected
a lot of customers that did not choose to do it. The outage really affected the AWS
Elastic Block Storage service, or EBS, which essentially is mounted store, storage devices that are accessible
from the EC2 instances. So think of these as large volumes of data
that are being stored, that EC2 instances, VM's, virtual machines are accessing
them as they're running the servers. Now, in AWS similarly this volume
runs inside an availability zone, and it uses two networks. A primary network that is used for
EC2 and EBS control plane traffic, when I say control plane traffic, I mean
basic operations like create a volume, close a volume, open a volume. This is as opposed to data traffic which
actually transfers the real data that is stored in that volume. Control plain traffic is relatively less in volume compared to the data plane
traffic but it is very, very, important. So anyway a primary network is used for
EC2 and EBS control plane traffic, and the secondary network is used for
overflow. The secondary network used to be over
provisioned when this outage happened, used for overflow provisioned
with a lower capacity. Because the only goal of, [SOUND] of having it was to
capsule the overflow traffic. If the primary network was full, then you would overflow some of
the traffic with a secondary network. The control information is
replicated across zones. This is for
availability of the control information. And, this includes meta information
about the volumes, where they're stored, how much data is stored in them,
but not the actual data itself. That's what I mean by control information. The EBS volumes are replicated for durability and
each volume has a primary replica. Whenever the replica is whenever one
of the replicas is out of sync, or when there's a node failure detected,
the replicas are programmed to do aggressive re-mirroring of data,
at least, before this outage happened. Which means that if the primary discovers
that one of the backups is gone or missing or is not responsive, it will try
to aggressively create another backup. Because, you know, it doesn't want to lose data if another
failure happens at the primary. So, here is the outage timeline itself. At 12:47 a.m., there was a routine primary
network capacity upgrade that was supposed to be done in the availability
zone in the US East Region. The traffic was shifted off several
primary network routers to other primary network routers. So far, so good. This was as intended. However, the critical error was that
one of the operators involved in this capacity upgrade shifted traffic from one
such router to a secondary network router. Remember, the secondary network
router has very limited bandwidth, because it's only for overflow. But when you shift the entire traffic from
a primary network router to a secondary network, then the secondary network is
going to be overloaded and is going to, going to be overwhelmed with traffic. As a result, a lot of these packets and
messages are going to get dropped, and several EBS volumes will now not
be able to communicate at all. With their primary they don't
have any primary network, right? So this means that the primary
network is disconnected. The second network has low capacity and
overwhelmed, and many primary replicas have no backup. The team quickly discovered this critical
error after it started happening, and you might think that at this point
the outage will start to recover. But as you'd see with outage case studies, outages keep cascading because of other
reasons that come into play as well. In this particular case after
the team roll back the critical error the outages have already been triggered. Many primary replicas thought
that they had no back up. These automatically start a re-mirroring, I guess, simply because they thought,
well, there's no back up and if another hit failure happens at me,
then the data might be lost. So let me try to create another replica. And this was happening at all the affected EBS volumes that were on that
particular primary network. So all at once the free network
capacity was quickly used and replicas were creating more traffic
that when they were trying to re-mirror the data,
this overwhelmed the network even more. And made things even worse. So, you can see how this cycle
is a cascading loop of very, very bad things,
leading to even worse things. And this is what is known
as a re-mirroring storm which affected about 13%
of the EBS volumes in AWS. When the network was unavailable for
the control plane traffic, this meant that it was unable to serve
create volume API requests for EBS, which meant that new volumes
could not be created. And so a lot of these control plane
operations like failed volume requests started to back up they started
to have a long time out, and they started to build up in queues. When the thread pool filled up,
the control plane started to reject these create volume requests, and this is where
the customers and users really started to see the outage affecting the servers
that they were trying to access or run. At 2:40 a.m., this is,
again, at morning, the, you know EBS engineers are working
hard to resolve this outage. The team disabled all new create
volume API requests and at 2:50 a.m., within a few minutes all error rates and
latencies for the EBS APIs start to recover
they start to go down. Again, you might think here that
the outage is starting to end here. But once again cascading
causes come into play. Two issues, two issues made things worse. The first is that primaries searching for
potential replicas did not back off. When they tried to create new replicas
they overwhelmed the network with traffic. This meant that they could
not create new replicas. But the way the primaries were programmed
was that they would try equally or harder equally hard or harder to create that primary, that backup
replica when they failed the last time. They did not back off which
meant that they did not wait for a longer time to create, to, to make their
next attempt of creating the backup. 'Kay, so
this made the system much worse because it overran the network with, with data. Also, a race condition had been known
to exist in the EBS code that was only triggered by high request rates and this
was exactly one of the situations where you had very high request rates and so
this caused even more node failures. So at 5:30 a.m.
that morning error rates and latencies started to rise again. And the engineers had to tackle,
grapple with this again. So once again,
a little bit of background here. The re-mirroring is essentially
a negotiation between an EC2 node, an EBS node, and the EBS control plane. This renegotiation is required so that you ensure that there is
exactly one primary for each volume. Due to the race condition
EBS node started to fail and the rate of these negotiations increased,
and this affected the EC2 nodes as well. This caused even more node failures and that therefore it again caused rate of
negotiations to increase, and you can see how the cycle is a cascading loop of
things getting bad and worse and worser. This resulted in the brown-out of AB,
EBS API faci, functionalities. A brown-out is essentially where
you don't have a blackout. It's not that the outage
completely takes EBS out, but the operations are pretty unreliable. It's the brown term comes from
from electric power where, you know, instead of having white
light which is normal light, you'd have brown light when the voltage
goes below the recommended voltage. So something similar happened in
the EBS because of these functionality, because of this outage. So at 8:20 a.m. in the morning, the team started disabling
all communication between EBS cluster in the affected availability zone,
and the EBS control plane. The availability zone was still down and
unresponsive all very slow, but the control plane started
recovering slowly. At 11:30 a.m. the team figured out how to prevent the
EBS servers in the affected availability zone from doing this
aggressive futile re-mirroring where they were not able
to create any backups. And availabilities all start to
recover at this point of time. Customers still continued to
face high error rates for new EBS-backed EC2 instances
until noon new instances that, for creating the new EBS volumes still
suffered fairly high error rates. And one of the reasons for this was that another new EBS control
plane API had recently been launched. It was for attaching new EC2 instances to
volumes, and that had some error rates and some bugs which were being hidden earlier
by the outage, but that there were, that, that the engineers were seeing now that
the outage was starting to get resolved. So again, you know, the, these are other causes that come into
play that keep the outage going on and on. So by noon, however, the good news was that no more volumes
were getting into the stuck state but 13% of the volumes stayed in the stuck
state meaning that they were not really accessible, and they were not able
to create the back up copies. There was a pretty long tale of
recovery for this particular outage and you can read more details about this
on the post mortem report by noon, April 24th which is several days after. And the outage all but available percent
of the volumes had been restored. So 99% of the volumes that were
affected had been restored. Eventually 0.07% of the affected
volumes could never be recovered, and the data was lost permanently. Amazon Web Services did give credit
to these affected customers, not just the ones who lost the data,
but also the ones whose service was unavailable for
a significant period of time. This outage affected not only EC2 and EBS, but also affected the relational database
of the service, also known as RDS the, especially the ones that were
single availability zone. So what are the lessons we learned from
this particular outage case study? First outages or failures that are large
often start with a human error, in AWS case the human error
was the operator moving the entire traffic from a primary
network to a secondary network and the secondary network was never intended
to take over for the primary network. It was only intended to
be an overflow network. But that's not the only reason
why the outages keep going on. They keep going on or they balloon
because of cascading other failures that happen in the system, which may, or may
not have anything to do with human error. For the specific case of AWS this outage
could have been avoided in some ways. First, if the network reconfiguration
processes had been audited well, to create, for instance a step-by-step
protocol for upgrades, and if the operator had followed these steps
one-by-one, then perhaps the mistake that triggered the outage of moving data,
all the data from a primary to a secondary network, then that mistake would
never have happened, perhaps. They could have had the secondary network
not just be an overflow network, but instead, have enough capacity to
take over for a primary network. That would also have prevented the outage. The re-mirroring storm really
kept the outage going. And if pri, if primaries had backed off,
meaning that if they tried to create a backup and they failed,
then they wait for slightly longer than the last time around to make their
next attempt at creating the backup. 'Kay, if the primaries had
backed off then the re-mirroring storm would not have happened everyone
would have played nice with each other, and the outage would not
have kept cascading. That this condition also kept the outage
going so fixing it ahead of time might have prevented the outage from
going on as long as it did. Users who wrote code to take explicit
advantage of multiple availability zones were not affected
as much by this outage, as users who just had
data on one availability. Also, throughout this outage AWS kept giving continuous updates to
its customers and its users. And their users but in general,
you know, AWS used this as an incentive as a catalyst to design better
dashboard communication tools. And if you go to AWS you will find such dashboard tools that give the health
of each one of their services. The same is true for other cloud
providers, too, like Google and Microsoft Azure and so on and so forth. AWS gave service credits for his customers that were affected
by this particular outage. [MUSIC]