[MUSIC] In this lecture, we're going to see
some basic cryptography concepts. These are applicable to not
just distributive systems, but computer systems in general,
that want to use cryptography. So an important terminology that is used
in a lot of security protocols when, especially when discussing
cryptography is that of principals. And, essentially a principal is a process
that carries out operations, or actions on behalf of a user. If I say a principal is Alice, essentially that means that the process
is acting on behalf of the user Alice. Similarly, Bob, Carol, and Dave are users,
or the principal names, and as you can notice, these are starting
with the letters of the English alphabet. Eve is typically an, evil, attacker. Mallory is typically malicious, and
Sara sometimes is used as the server. So in cryptography,
an important concept is a key. A key is essentially a sequence of
bytes that is assigned to a user, and the key can be used to lock a given
message, any given message. So, you can take a message, and you can take the key, and
you can lock the message, so that, only that key can then be used to
unlock that particular locked message. Okay, so if you don't have the key
then you cannot unlock that message. Essentially this is used to ensure that
messages are sent over the network in a way that only authorized
individuals who have access to the key can in fact unlock that locked message. Keys are used in many, in many different
ways, and there are different flavors of using keys, and there are many
different flavors of key-based systems. The way in which you use a key is,
you take a message, you apply it the key on it, and
this process is known as encryption. This leads to an encoded message,
which is, again, a sequence of bytes, but essentially, the encoded message, the
sequence of bytes, would not make sense to any attacker who is able to intercept
the message on the network. Unless the attacker also
has access to the key. So only those with access to the key
can take the imported message sequence of bytes, use the key on it,
and then use decryption so that you get back the original message,
the original sequence of bytes. If you don't have access to the key and you use a decryption on
the encoded message. You're likely to get back
some garbage gobbledy gook, which is not the original message. So no one can decode an encoded message
without having access to the key. So if you have two individuals that have
access to a given key, only those two individuals can send messages to each
other that are encoded and decoded, or encrypted and
decrypted using that particular key. No other attacker or
no other individual in the system. Even if they are not an attacker,
is able to, would be able to listen to messages that are being exchanged
by this pair of individuals. So as I mentioned, there are different
flavors of cryptography systems. There are two important flavors. They are symmetric and asymmetric. Let's discuss the a symmetric first. Then we discuss the asymmetric later on. So symmetric key systems
Alice may be given a key, we'll note that as K of A, or just KA. This key is secret to Alice. There might also be a key that
is shared between Alice and Bob, that's the order is Kab,
sometimes it's Ka,b. This key is known to both Alice, as it is
Bob, and this can be used to encrypt and decrypt messages that are sent between,
Alice and Bob. You use the same key, Kab, to,
both encrypt and decrypt the message. For instance, the data encryption
standard uses 56-bit keys. And when you are given the message DES
essentially splits up the message into 64 bit blocks and then it applies the 56
bit key to encrypt each 64 bit block and the output is then concatenated
to the previous block's output, and that's the encoded message. The second flavor of systems is what
is known as public private key systems. Here, each user is given not just one key,
but is given a pair of keys. So Alice has both a private key and
a public key. Alice's private key known as
Kapriv is known only to Alice and no other principal in the system
knows Alice's private key. That's why it's private. It's secret. A Ka pub, Alice's public key is
known to everyone in the system. 'Kay, this is, the exact opposite
of the private key, 'kay. But the private and public keys are paired
with each other in a special way. In the sense that any message that is
encrypted with the private key, Alice's private key, can be decrypted only by
using Alice's public key, and the reverse. Any message that is encrypted
using Alice's public key can only be decrypted
using Alice's private key. So typically you generate
public-private keys in pairs using some well known algorithm. And these key, these pair of keys
are related to each other so that a message encrypted with one key can
only be decrypted with the other key. And cannot be decrypted by an,
with any other key in the system. One of the common ways of
generating these private, public private key pairs is the RSA or the Rivest Shamir Adleman algorithm
which typically uses prime numbers. So RSA is a well known standard for
instance of a public private ky system. A PGP which some of you
might be using already, known as Pretty Good Privacy is another
example of a public private key system. Keys need to be several hundreds, in some
cases, several thousands of not just bits. But several bytes long. And the longer they are,
the more secure is the system. Because the harder it is for attackers to
guess what the key is or to break the key. And the key's very small. So the key is just four bytes. And essentially the attacker can, can
cycle through all the four combinations. Or other. Say it's four bits. Right. And so the can, can cycle for all the too
powerful combinations of ones and zeros. And whichever one leads to a message that
seems to make sense, would be your key. So the larger your key is, the more
computationally difficult it becomes for the attacker to guess what your key is. How does everyone know Alice's public key? Well, typically,
a public key infrastructure, or known as a PKI, is maintained. Which maintains the public keys of not
just Alice but all the principles in the system, so anyone can access
anyone else's public key. If Alice wants to send a secret message M
that Alice only wants Bob to be able to read, essentially Alice encrypts that
message with Bob's public key, so you take the message M. And you apply Bob's public
key K B pub on it, and the resulting encoded
message is then sent to Bob. This can only be decrypted
by using Bob's private key, because that's the only key that's
paired up with Bob's public key. And so Bob is the only one that has access
to that private key, his own private key. And so Bob is the only one who will be
able to decrypt this encoded message. Okay, so when you apply Bob's private
key when you, apply, decryption, using Bob's private key on the encoded message,
you will get back the original message. This is symmetric, too, so
you can do the same thing, by using the public key first and
then the private key next. So if you encode a message with your
private key, then it can be decrypted using the public key and this mechanism
you'll see later on is used for implementing signatures
in the digital word. So when do you use the shared or symmetric
key system versus the public key system? Each of these systems has their pros and
cons. Let's discuss the cons. The shared key system
reveals too much information, makes it harder to revoke
permissions from individuals. For instance,
suppose there is a group of say ten or 15 individuals that are sharing
the same group key, so that they can send messages to each
other only within the group and no one else outside the group would
be able to understand these messages. Now, if you want to remove
one principle from the group. Essentially you need to change the group
key for everyone in the group. And that's [INAUDIBLE] harder. So revocation is a fairly expensive
operation in the shared key system. In public private key systems,
the disadvantage is that the encryption or decryption operation could be very costly,
meaning it consumes time. So if you have a very large message. That encrypting the message
might be very expensive. And there are some variants of
public/private key systems where encryption is a fast operation,
but in those variants, decryptions become a slow operation. So, at least one of these two operations
ends up being costly and time consuming. As a result, some systems use a hybrid
where they might use a public/private key system to generate shared keys, and
then later on use these in use this, this shared key on
the messages themselves. In the next lecture, we're going to see
how to use the cryptography techniques that we have seen in this lecture, to implement the mechanisms that we
discussed in the previous lecture. [MUSIC]