[MUSIC] In this lecture, we are going to recap and
summarize some of the lessons that we've learned over the three key studies
of your seen of the central outages. Outages are inevitable, whether they
are triggered by human error or whether they are triggered by fire or
some other natural causes. They are going to happen no
matter which company you are, and no matter how robust you
claim your infrastructure is. We've seen how the leading
cloud providers AWS, Facebook, and
The Planet suffered from outages. But these are three examples of
companies that also kept their affected customers and users updated
throughout all the entire outage with frequent updates
about what was going on. And after the outage was
resolved they gave the, affected folks coupons and discounts. They also analyzed and
published post-mortems of the outage. What led to the outage,
what kept the outage going, and how they fixed it for the future? All of these bullets
are customer confidence. So, if you are going to run a data center
for customers, it's a good idea that you are honest and open and transparent
with users all the way through. Many companies use dashboards
with real time information, so you can check out Google Apps dashboard if
you are just searching Google for it, or check out the AWS dashboard,
if you search on any search engine for it. These have up to the minute
information about which services are suffering from a,
a bad state or which services are healthy. And if it's a bad state,
what is currently going wrong and what is, in some cases, the expected time
to recover from these outages? However, not all companies are as
open as the ones we have discussed. RIM which is the maker of the Blackberry
had pretty long outage in 2007 a day long outage but they never
published a post-mortem about it. Hostway in 207 informed customers it would
move its data center from Miami to Tampa. And that they had a planned outage
that would be 12 hours long, but when they executed it,
the actual outage was between 3 to 7 days. So, planning is very important as well. Overall we learn a few lessons. First, the data center fault tolerance
is somewhat akin to human ailments or medicine today. Most common illnesses
are addressable today, so. In most parts of the world, at least
the developed world common cold and the flu influenza you can just go to the
doctor and they will give you a medicine for it or you just take rest and
you'll recover from it. This is similar to how
crash failures are or crash stop failures or fail stop failures
are handled in most of systems today. There is well known protocols and well known administered algorithms
that are fault-tolerant. However, non-common cases
can be very horrible when the end of life diseases hit you,
there are no really known cures for most forms of cancer,
at least as of today. Similarly even outages happen, it's very hard to respond
very quickly to the outage. It's very hard to know what's going
to go wrong during an outage and to prepare for it. Testing is very important,
whenever you set up a service, whenever you set up a center, you need to
make sure that you've tested it enough. Especially that you have tested it for
disaster tolerance. So for instance, American Eagle, during a
disaster, when the disaster was going on, they discovered that they had backup
data center which they had set up so that they could failover to it. But they never tested whether
the failover actually worked. So during the disaster, they discovered
to their chagrin that actually the failover didn't really work, so they
could not use their backup data center. Had they tested, well then they would
have fixed this failover mechanism. Upgrades that are planned but that failed are that failed
are also a common cause of outage. So, someone for instance tried to upgrade all the oasis
and all the machines in a data center. But for some reason, that upgrade failed. This causes those machines
to be in a hung state, and causes the data center to be out. And so whenever there's an upgrade, you need to have a fallback plan that
you can rely on in order to, for instance, rollback the upgrade and
restore the old state. Data availability and recovery is something that we've
talked about during the case studies. Business continuity processes and
disaster-tolerance is an important requirement for
many of the cloud services today. This can be provided by cross-data
center replication, either provided by the provider or provided by a customer
explicitly by writing code for it. Consistent document is very important too,
there are well known books, and well known, treatises on the fact that making lists is a very good way to make
sure that you are not making mistakes. One of the examples of this is that there was an outage with the Google
app engine several years ago. And the outage was prolonged because
the actual operations personnel did not know which of the versions of docs
which had lists of things to do on them was the current latest version. There were multiple conflicting versions,
some of them old, some of them new, but they didn't really know which ones
were new and which ones were old. In order to avoid this in the future, Google has adopted the fix off, explicitly
marking old documents as deprecated. So that when someone looks it, they
know that okay, this is an old version. And perhaps the document also contains
a link to a newer version of the document. This is a good practice for
us to follow in princi, in principle, even if it's for
any of the documentation that we write. Outages in generals, as we've seen, in general are a,
a cascading series of failures. They start with a trigger, which may
be a human trigger in some cases. But they keep going, but they keep going
because of other causes that, that keep, that come into play. And usually somewhere along
the way there is a a loop, a cascading loop that happens. And perhaps there are new ways,
new techniques that they can discover or invent to break this chain,
to break this loop and to prevent these outages from going on for
as long as they do today. There are also other sources of outages
that we have not discussed in our case studies. Denial of service attacks, distributed denial of service attacks
are well known causes of outages. Internet outages where the entire
network is blocked off and there is no communication possible between data
centers is a well-known cause of outages. For instance,
undersea cable might be cut by a trawler. There might be a failure in the DNS. A government that engages
in censorship might block particular websites by
blocking the DNS entries. These are all well known
sources of outages. In some of these countries where DNS is
blocked there are alternate DNS services open DNS services as well that
are available and that users use whenever they want to access a website
that is other wide, otherwise censored. Many failures are unexpected as we
have come to know in this course. But also there are planned outages for
instance, kernel upgrades or upgrades of particular parts
of distributed services. And so when you have planned outages,
these need to be planned well. They need to have steps that are
well-documented and that are followed and ticked off by the operators as they
go along from one step to the next. Also you need to have
fallback plans in place. So if this particular planned upgrade
goes wrong for whatever reason,. Then what is a fallback plan. How do I roll back this upgrade, so that I
can get back to an operational state and then perhaps try to upgrade
later on in the future. Hopefully, this, this set of keys
has been informative to you and the lessons here have been both
informative as well as useful to you if you are planning to start
up your own data center or planning to run services one some
of the existing data centers. [MUSIC]