[MUSIC] Hi there.
In this next series of lectures we're going to see some of the basic
security concepts as applicable to not just distributed systems, but
also as used in general computer systems. So, there are many different kinds of
security threats that can be launched on a distributed system or
any system that uses servers. Three of the common security threats
are leakage, tampering and vandalism. Leakage essentially means that
someone gets unauthorized access to a service or to a data. That they're able to read or
access, read the data or access the service while they
should not actually be able to. For instance, if someone else gets to know
your bank balance, who's not authorized to know your bank balance, who's not one of
the account holders on your bank account. Then that's leakage. Tampering goes a step further where
someone not just gets access, but is able to modify data or
is able to modify the service. For instance, if an unauthorized
individual modifies the balance in your bank account without you having authorized
that, without you having written a check or done a bank, bank transfer
then that is known as tampering. And finally, vandalism essentially means
that someone interferes with the normal service or normal operation of the system
without necessarily benefiting directly from this attack. The most common type of vandalism
attack is denial of service, where for instance a particular service may be un,
inaccessible to legal customers. Because an, an attacker is
bombarding that service with a lot of unnecessary and
with a lot of unnecessary messages. So these are, threats are typically
carried out while some attacks. Some of the common attacks
are listed on this slide. Eavesdropping essentially means that
the attacker is able to listen to messages by tapping into the network. For instance, if someone is able to
intercept all the messages in the network, then they are eavesdropping. Masquerading goes a step further where the
attacker is not just able to read messages but is able to pretend to be someone else. And you will see an example of this as we
discuss some of our security protocols. Essential this is similar
to identity theft. But in the computer world, where a machine
claims to be acting on behalf of user Alice, while in fact they're acting
on behalf of user Eve, who is you. Then, you have message tampering where
the attacker is able to modify messages in the underlying network and,
and send them forward so that they can, for instance,
masquerade to be someone else. You have replay attacks where the the
attacker is able to replay old messages. This is a particularly insidious form of
attack, where by replaying old messages, for instance, you can prove yourself
to be someone else that you're not. And finally, denial of service is
typically carried out by bombarding a particular port, say the http port. So that the other regular
messages by valid, legal clients cannot get through
that port just because of being overwhelmed by the other
messages being sent by the attacker. So, how do you address these challenges? Well, there are three properties that
secure systems typically try to provide. These are known as the CIA properties. They stand for confidentiality,
integrity and availability. Confidentiality essentially says that
you're protected against disclosure of your data to unauthorized individuals. This addresses the threat of leakage. It says that your data is
essentially confidential, and only those who are allowed to
read the data are able to do so. Integrity essentially says that only
those who are allowed to alter the data are allowed to do so, who are able to
write the data are allowed to do so. For instance, for your bank account,
it maybe only you who is allowed to alter the data, and of course, the bank
who might be acting on behalf of you. Anyone else would not be able to alter or
corrupt your data. This addressess the threat of tampering. And finally,
availability says that the service or the data is always reachable,
is always readable and writable letters. You're able to carry your operations
on the service or the data. And this addresses
the threat of vandalism. So, these three properties are examples
of properties that we desire in a system. This is what we want
the system to archive. We haven't yet said yet how the system
achieves these three properties. So, this difference between what and how can be laid out by differentiating
between policy and mechanism. And this is one of the key aspects key concepts in distributed systems
as far as security is concerned. This is very important for
us to understand. This has been advocated
by many scientists and is actually used by secure systems today
to differentiate between what and how. A security policy indicates what is
secure system wishes to accomplish. Okay, so this is typically a human
level goal of what you want the or the system to be secure against and
how you want it to be secure. For instance, the CIA properties
of confidentiality, integrity and availability properties are properties
that we desire from a secure system, and so these are security policies. A security mechanism, on the other hand, indicates how these
goals are accomplished. So given a security policy, you can
design security mechanisms which then, implement that particular policy. For instance,
you could use encryption capabilities and a variety of other mechanisms
that we'll all see in this series of lectures to implement
a given set of policies. It's very important for you to be able to
distinguish between the security policy and the security mechanism because
typically these are separate. And it's not always
the case that security, a set of security mechanisms always
accomplishes the security policy. That gap is typically what a designer
of secure protocol needs to bridge. So, what kinds of mechanisms exist? Well there are three types of
mechanisms that are popularly used. These are known as the Golden A's
by some security researchers. They are authentication,
authorization, and auditing. Authentication essentially is
a mechanism that verifies that a user claiming to be say,
Alice, is in fact, Alice. And of course, the user is
communicating over the network, so the only way you have of,
of authenticating the user is via message. Suppose we authenticated the user. And we know that Alice, is in fact,
Alice but we we need to check that Alice was trying to access file
in fact is allowed to access file. Is Alice really authorized
to access file in the particular mode that
Alice is attempting to. That is known as authorization,
that's the second A. The third A is Auditing. And that stands for essentially knowing
how a particular attack was carried out. So for instance,
if Eve managed to attack the system and gain access to some data,
how was that attack carried out? So that we can fix the system for
the future? Typically, this is done by logging
all the operations in the system and then later on looking at the logs and
mining the logs and perhaps replaying the logs and
figuring out what went wrong. So, how do you design a secure system? Well, essentially it's kind of hard to do
this because you don't necessarily know how powerful your attacker is. Your attacker may have
access to data centers. You attacker may have
the capability to listen, to listen to all the messages that
are in the underlying network. So when you design a security protocol, first you need to set down on
paper what your attacker model is. What are your assumptions about
what your attacker is able to do? For instance, you might assume that
your attacker is able to read messages that are in the underlying network,
but is not able to modify messages. A different attacker model
might involve the attacker also being able to modify the messages. So, what are exactly the assumptions
that you assume from your attacker? This is very important
to lay down on paper. Of course, this attacker model should
be tied to reality which means that you can't just makeup
an attacker model out of thin air. It needs to actually be an attacker
model that is somewhat real, that corresponds to real attackers. So once have that accurate model then,
you have the problem statement and you now, now need to design this security
mechanisms that satisfy the policy that is specified as a part
of the problem statement. Then you need to analyze and approve, perhaps formally approve, that
the mechanisms that you have designed, in fact satisfy the policy under
the adapted model that you assumed. And this is an important part
of any secure system design. Finally, when you have
designed a secure system, you need to analyze the behavior of
your system when there are no attacks. This is the common case. Attacks do happen, but
they're not the common case. They happen rarely. And when they're no attacks going on,
you want your system to be as fast as when the system did not have any
of your security mechanisms in place. So, analyzing the effect
of your security mechanisms on the overall performance
is very important. Typically, when you add security
mechanisms to an existing system which was insecure to begin with, you're going to
impact the performance of the system. Perhaps the throughput will go
down by a few percentage points. If a throughput goes down by say 2 or 3% then that's probably
acceptable performance overhead. But, if your throughput goes down by 100%
then, you're in trouble because now, you know, you're incurring a much higher
cost for the security mechanisms. And that's probably not a good sign
of security mechanisms anyway. So, in the next lecture we're going to see
some of the basic cryptography techniques, very basic cryptography techniques. And then,
after that we'll use cryptography to implement some of the mechanisms
that we have seen from this lecture. [MUSIC]