[MUSIC] Finally we are going to see how to use
the cryptography techniques that we have already seen to implement
the mechanisms that we've already seen. So we are going to use cryptography
to implement authentication, digital signatures,
digital certificates, and then our list has a little
bit of authorization too. Just for completeness' sake. So first authentication. Authentication is a process where two
principles verify each other's identity's. So if Alice and
Bob are communicating with each other Alice needs to convince herself
that Bob is in fact Bob. Bob needs to convince himself
that Alice is in fact Alice. There are two flavors of authentication. They are known as direct authentication
and indirect authentication. Direct authentication involves direct
authentication between Alice and Bob. Indirect authentication uses a trusted
third party server Typically, this is called an authentication server. For instance, it might be a server run
by a well trusted company like Verisign. We'll discuss indirect
authentication in a second. Let's discuss direct authentication first. So, we have two consumers, Alice and
Bob, who already share a shared key. We'll call that KAB, and Alice and Bob need to verify that each of them is,
in fact, who they are pretending to be. So Alice needs to convince
herself that Bob is Bob, and Bob needs to convince
himself that Alice is Alice. So for
this we use a shared key obviously, so Alice first sends a message to Bob
saying hey, I'm Alice over here. And Bob sends back a random number,
which is known as a nonce. A nonce is an accepted terminology and a
popular terminology in security protocols, essentially Bob generates the nonce for every single session that he
has with any principle and often for any single authentication
session, a new nonce is generated. Why is it generated? Well, Bob wants to see Alice
using the shared key on a nonce. So Alice sends back the value of the nonce
but encrypted with the shared key. And since Alice and Bob are the only two
with the original shared key KAB, Bob can now verify by using KAB on the same nonce,
RB that in fact Alice is in fact Alice because Alice is the only other principle
that has access to the shared key KAB. So this point, Bob is convinced
that Alice is, in fact, Alice. How about the reverse? Well, we do the same thing. So, Alice also sends a nonce,
a different nonce, obviously RA, to Bob. Bob encrypts it with the same shared key,
KAB, and then when Alice receives this, Alice can verify that,
in fact, Bob is Bob. And so this is wonderful, and it is pretty
good protocol, it involves five messages. And it involves five
messages transmission times. Now let's look at it. So why do you need five messages? Essentially Alice and Bob are doing
the same thing symmetrically but in opposite directions. Why not send this second nonce RA earlier, say with the first message
over here with Alice. And then when Bob sends back its reply,
already you can send back. The encrypted version of RA. So why don't we run the more optimized
version of this protocol, where RA, Alice is allowed to send earlier and
Bob can also send back its reply earlier. This is essentially trying to achieve this
protocol here on the slide is trying to achieve the same thing on the previous
slide, except it's using three messages instead of five, and it involves only
three message transmission times. Well, not so fast. We have to be really careful
about protocols like this. If you try to optimize them,
they may be subject to replay attacks. They may be subject to replay attacks even
if you don't try to optimize them, so this particular protocol here is vulnerable to
the attack known as the replay attack. So Alice may in fact not be Alice. Alice may in fact be Eve. Who is pretending to be Alice. And so, Eve might start a session saying, hey I'm Alice,
pretending to be Alice with a new nonce. And Bob sends back a new nonce RB along
with the encrypted version of RA. Okay?
Notice that Eve does not have access to the shared key KAB at all. So, Eve has no way to duplicate
this message KAB or RA, or anything like that but
Eve can use the sequence of bytes or bits. How does Eve do this? Well, Eve starts a second session
where Eve says hey I'm Alice. And in the second session she reuses
the same nonce RB that was sent by Bob. So at this point,
Bob would send back a new nonce RB2, but also the encrypted version of RB,
encrypted with KAB. And this sequence of bytes can now be
reused by Eve to finish the first session. Eve now goes back to the first session and applies back to Bob saying hey,
here is the encrypted version of RB. But in fact, Eve did this without
ever knowing the shared key KAB. But by simply views in the sequence of
bytes KAB encrypted used to encrypt RB from the second session,
by replaying this message, Eve was able to convince Bob that,
in fact, she is Alice. And, at this point, you have
a security violation in your system. So now you've seen what
a replay attack looks like. There are a variety of replay attacks
that happen in secure systems, but essentially it means the attacker is
able to replay messages from a different session over here. So, the second flavor of authentication
is known as indirect authentication. This uses an authentication
server little as AS over here. Typically this is a trusted server,
trusted by everyone. So essentially every principle in
the system shares a key directly with authentication server. You can think of this being
the public-private key or a shared key between Alice and
AS and also between Bob and AS. So Alice would send a message to the AS
saying hey I would like to start a session with Bob. The AS sends back a ticket
which consists of, the AS actually generates a new shared
key for this particular session. This shared key is KAB, but it does not
send back the shared key as plain text. Why?
Because any attacker would then be able to intercept this message which
is sent in plain text. Instead the AS uses the shared key with
Alice to encrypt the shared key itself, KAB so that Alice is then able to decrypt
this first part of the message and get the shared key KAB and is also
decrypts KAB using AS shared key with Bob. So Bob is able to give the second
part of the shared key and no one else is able to do that. Alice retrieves KAB from
the original ticket message. And Alice and Bob are the only ones
who will be able to decrypt parts of the ticket message. So Alice is able to decrypt the KAB, but
then sends out the rest of the ticket, the second half of the ticket onto Bob, which can then at that point obtain KAB by
decrypting that second part of the ticket. At this point, Alice and
Bob both have K AB and they are the only ones to have
access to the shared key AB, because no one else can decrypt
parts of this ticket message. And now, Alice and Bob can start communicating with
each other by using the key KAB. So this way Alice and Bob use this third indirect authentication
server to share a shared key. Next we move on to digital signatures. Digital signatures are just
like real signatures. When you sign a document people expect
that the signature is authentic, that no one is able to forge your
signature, so it's unforgeable, anyone is able to verify your signature
and finally it's non-repudiable. Once you have signed something you
cannot withdraw that signature. So to sign a message M, so to say that,
hey, I am the one who has signed message M, Alice would encrypt
the message with her own private key. Okay?
So when we were sending secured messages
we were using public keys to encrypt. Here we use a private key
to encrypt the message. So you send the message M along with
the encrypted version of the message M encrypted with Alice's private key. Why do we use the private key? Well this allows anyone in
the world to be able to verify by using Alice's public key, that in fact,
this second part of the message, the signature,
is in fact Alice's signature. So if you use Alice's public key to
decrypt the second part of the message, you should get back the original message
M, and in this way you know that Alice is the only one that
could have signed this message. If an attacker, for instance,
modifies some bytes of the message M, then decrypting the second part
will not give you M, and so you immediately you know that
the message has been tampered with. If a different attacker modifies
some of the bytes of the encrypted, the second part of the message M,
The encrypted version message M. Then recrypting it with Alice's public
key will give you some gobbledygook, and that'll be different from the message M. And this point again, you know that
the message has been tampered with, okay? So this ensures that messages, if they're
tampered with, can be discovered quickly. However as you know encrypting and decrypting can be fairly
costly operations. They might involve a lot of time
as you've already seen before and if you are going to do the signing
business very frequently this might become a very
inefficient operation. To make it more efficient you can
use a one reHash function first. For instance, secure hash algorithm one,
message digest five. And you first hash the message,
which is typically a fast operation and results in a small approach,
usually just a few hundreds of bytes. And then you use the encryption
with a private key on this hash. So this ensures that you're using
the encryption of a very small sequence of bytes and so it's very fast. So you don't need to enter
the entire message, and on the receiving side when
someone is very far and trying to verify the signature,
they can also hash the message. Again the hashing operation is very fast. And then verify that when
you use a public key on the second part of the message you
get back the hash of the message, and that ensures that the signature
is in fact verified. Finally we discuss digital certificates. Again these are just
like real certificates. So, someone who gives you a certificate
saying hey, you have taken this particular C3 course should also be able to give
you certificates in the digital world. And to do this again digital certificates
use the concept of digital signatures like you have just seen. Digital certificates typically
have a standard format. And they have transivity property. So they have a standard format so
that principles who receive a certificate are able to verify that
the certificate is in fact correct. They have a transitive property so if someone is giving you a certificate,
that particular someone should be actually certified to give
you the certificate in the first place. And so you can trace a chain backwards,
a chain of certificates backwards, and it should end at a trusted authority,
which is at the root. So let's see an example of this. So, say Alice opens a bank account
at Charlie's Bank, and so Alice is given a digital certificate that says hey,
this is the account number for user Alice. The account number is 12345. And certifying authority
is Charlie's bank. There's a signature with certificate which
is essentially you take the a name a field the second field over here, the account
number field and you mash them together maybe do an addition or concatenation
whatever something that is consistent, and then you take a hash on that for
compaction so that it's compact. And then you apply Charlie's private
key to derive the signature. This means that anyone receiving the
certificate will be able to use Charlie's public key to decrypt the signature and
verify that in fact, when you add the name and account number, and hash
it using the well known hash algorithm. The good, bad and the same upward. If someone tampers with either the name,
the account number, or the signature fields in the certificate, then the certificate will become invalid
and people will not be able to use it. So essentially no one can tamper
with the certificate itself without affecting its correctness. So Eve, for instance, who might want
to insert the name Eve over here would not be able to do that because then
the certificate would become invalid. So here we have shown Alice getting
a certificate from Charlie, from Charlie's bank but Charlie in
turn should be given a certificate for instance for Charlie's public key. So a certificate that says Charlie's
public key is in fact Charlie's public key might be given by the banker's federation. So this would be a certificate
shown here given to Charlie. Once again here the name
field says Charlie's bank. Public key has the actual public key
in the The certifying authority is the Banker's Federation. Banker's Federation would then sign
this message by using the name and the public key over here along with
the Banker's Federation's private key. Anyone receiving this would be able
to then verify that in fact the name, public key and the signature are in
fact matching with each other. The Banker's Federation will be given
another certificate by Verisign, a well trusted authority. The Verisign will now be at the root
of the certificate tree in this particular case. And this particular certificate given by
Verisign to the Banker's Federation would say that the Banker's Federation is
being given the Public Key KFpub. And then it is signed by
the Verisign authority. Everyone trusts Verisign,
we're assuming here. And so
everyone is able to very the certificate. So you've seen that we have constructed
a chain where Alice is given a certificate by Charlie who is in turn given
a certificate by the banker's federation, who is in turn given
a certificate by Verisign and so, you have essentially a root,
a tree or a drag or draft of certificates that might be
given across pairs of individuals. And all the certificates if
you follow them in reverse, just follow the chains in reverse should
read to a well trusted root authority. Finally for
completeness we discuss authorization. So, when you have a given a pair
of principle trying to access a particular object,
say trying to write particular, how do you know whether that is
in fact an authorized operation? So for every pair of principle comma
object pairs in the system, you need to, you may want to maintain information
about whether that principle is allowed to access that object,
and if so in what mode. So some principles may be allowed
to reread a particular object, other principles may be allowed to read
as well as write to a given object. This is known as the access control
matrix, for every row of the matrix corresponds to a principle, and
every column corresponds to an object, so the i,j entry in this matrix is
maintaining information about whether the ith principle is allowed to access
the jth object and, if so, in what mode. However this matrix may be very large. There might be thousands of principles and there might be millions
of objects in the system. Also a lot of the entries in
the matrix might be empty. It might be a sparse matrix because
most of the principle comma object pairs the default entry might be no access. So this is a lot of wasted space. Instead you have two other options
the access control less than capability which are far more compact. The access control list
is a per object list of principles who are allowed
to access that object. Along with the mode of access
allowed to each individual. The capability list is
kind of the converse where you maintain a per
principle list of files or objects that this particular
principle is allowed to access. And the type of access that is allowed for
that particular principle. You could also split all the capability
lists into individual capabilities where for each principal comma file pair,
or each principal comma object pair, you may get information about whether that
principal is allowed access that file or that object. Okay, in this slide the terms file and
object are used interchangeably. Wrapping up our discussion of security. Security challenges abound
in today's disparate systems especially because of the large
scale of these systems. There are a lot of threats and attacks
that are possible on these systems. The confidentiality, integrity, and availability properties
are desirables properties. And then you use mechanisms
to implement these policies. Mechanisms such as encryption and
decryption. Also mechanisms such as shared key
infrastructures are probably private key infrastructures. And these can be used to implement
authentication, signatures, and digital certificates. We have also discussed authorization
which is important in secure systems. [MUSIC]