[MUSIC] Okay.
In this third and last outage case study, we're going to study an outage of
this company known as The Planet. This outage occurred on 31st May 2008. And once again, the information that
I'm discussing here is available from, the post which is available at
the URL shown on the slide, which is an availability digest URL. The, Planet at that, time at the time,
at the time of this outage was the fourth largest web hosting company, and
it supported 22,000 websites. It had six data centers at that time. Two in Houston, four in Dallas. This particular outage took down
9,000 servers and seven and a half thousand businesses. The outage started at about 6 p.m. With an explosion in
the H1 Houston Data Center a short circuit in the transformer
set the transformer on fire. Normally when the transformer goes
on fire, the backup power supply, the UPS kicks in to
keep the server online. However, in this case the fire in
the transformer caused an explosion of battery acid fumes from the UPS backup. So this was a cascading things of
failures, physical failures, that caused the power to go off [INAUDIBLE]
of the servers in the data center. Also because this was fire,
real fire here. This blew out three walls
of the first floor. So this is an example of an outage
that actually did not involve human error at all. I mean, you can argue that there was
potentially maintenance issues involved here that could have prevented
the transformer from catching on fire. But there's no explicit human trigger here
that triggered this particular outage. It was really fire in
this particular case. So there was an explosion that just
blew out three walls of the first floor. Thankfully, no servers were damaged,
but 9,000 servers were brought down because essentially they did not have
any power source at all to them. And the fire department
quickly responded to this, and they evacuated the building for
the safety of all the personnel. They also directed that the backup
generators could not be turned on because there was a fire hazard. Also, because of the fire hazard, no staff
are allowed back in until, about 10 p.m. However, there were several
services that went offline and several customers who were complaining
about the services being offline, and the rumor is that the Planet
staff had to physically ship some of the critical servers to some of
their other DC centers in, Houston and in Dallas on, you know, on their
pickup trucks and so on and so forth. Again, this is a rumor. It's unsubstantiated. I do not know whether this is true or not. But of course they could not transfer
all the 9,000 servers it affected, to the other data center, because the
other data centers were almost running at the capacity of their power and, cooling. So, by 5 p.m., June 2nd, power was
restored to the second floor, and on June 4th, a couple of days later, the first floor servers were being
restored back, one rack at a time. So, this was a very slow, painstakingly
slow process of bringing the datacenter, the affected datacenter back
online one rack at a time. All the while during this outage,
the planet was, the company was very transparent and
open with its customers. They provided frequent updates
to all its customers and the frequency of 15 minutes
to one hour per update. This kept the customers reasonably well
informed about what was going on and what was the expected time
to recover from the outage. What lessons can we
learn from this outage? Well first you know, outages will happen. Even if it's not human error,
they're going to happen. Fire happens, right? So as a customer who's running a service,
your service on a data center. You may want to back up
not just your data, but also your service across
multiple data centers. So that, there is four. So if one of the data centers goes down,
then the other data center is up, and it's able to service at
least some of the requests. Entire data centers could go down. Entire companies could go down. They could go bankrupt. So you may want to have backups not just
across data centers of the same provider. But across data centers
of different providers. [COUGH] So for instance you can want it
on one version of your service on Google on the Google Cloud. Another version on Amazon Web Services,
and another version on the Microsoft service. These are sometimes known as
business continuity plans, that insure that in spite of disasters
that happen at these different providers your service is still up and
running all the time. However, running your service on these
three different providers like the example that I mentioned with Google Cloud AWS and
is easier said than done today. It's very hard. Because these different cloud
providers have very different APIs and very different ways in
which they store data. It's an open question about whose
responsibility should it be to replicate data and
services across different providers. Should we not buy
the providers themselves? Perhaps the customer pays some
extra insurance money, and the provider ensure that the data and
services are replicated no matter what. Or should it be done
explicitly by the customer? This, of course, is far more painstaking because it
involves extra work, at the providers, and also because the different providers
store data in many different formats. So there is data lock in at each provider
and when you want to transfer data from one provider to another, you need to
export the data into a common format and then re import it back into
the destination data center format. It's a, so, the whole problem becomes
very challenging because of the lack of. Standard API's, and also because of the
lack of, and also because of the lack of, standard, data formats, which leads to,
data lock in at individual providers. 'Kay so, if you go to the provider
all this may cost customers more, but it's sort of similar range as premiums,
maybe that's a way to go forward. Or maybe, you know, customers will,
start to build, their own, business continuity plans that
cover multiple providers. The next few years will, tell us, which way the industry is going
to go on this particular front. [MUSIC]